[Amit Varma]: There's an old cliche about no matter what truth you discover about India, the opposite
[Amit Varma]: is also true.
[Amit Varma]: I've always argued that India has always been deeply illiberal and my main piece of
[Amit Varma]: evidence for this is the way women are treated.
[Amit Varma]: Indian culture is unquestionably sexist and even in the year 2020, most women are second
[Amit Varma]: class citizens in India and yet Indian history is littered with badass women.
[Amit Varma]: Some of them are outliers operating despite social constraints, but many of them were
[Amit Varma]: enabled by social norms, particularly in Kerala, where for centuries a matrilineal system made
[Amit Varma]: women the dominant figures in their households with men taking a backseat.
[Amit Varma]: And very often the women who have stepped forward to take charge have proved themselves
[Amit Varma]: to be capable of leading from the front.
[Amit Varma]: Let's shift the lens for just a moment to the present.
[Amit Varma]: At the time of recording this episode on January 16, 2020, protests have been raging against
[Amit Varma]: the Citizenship Amendment Act for a few weeks now.
[Amit Varma]: These are mostly spontaneous protests erupting from below instead of being managed from the
[Amit Varma]: top.
[Amit Varma]: And it's especially striking to me how many women have come forward to lead the charge.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe these women will lead us towards more freedom.
[Amit Varma]: And if they need to search for inspiration, all they have to do is look south towards
[Amit Varma]: Travancore.
[Unknown]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Unknown]: Our weekly podcast on economics, politics, and behavioral science.
[Unknown]: Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: My guest in today's episode is a young historian, Manu Pillay, and we'll be discussing his first
[Amit Varma]: book, The Ivory Throne.
[Guest]: Manu, welcome to the show.
[Guest]: Thank you for having me again.
[Amit Varma]: This is, I think, the third time.
[Amit Varma]: This is the third time, yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And we have actually in the past discussed how you kind of got drawn to history and stuff.
[Amit Varma]: But I'm going to ask you again, because this is your first book.
[Amit Varma]: So in the context of your book, it's sort of worth asking, you know, why this subject
[Amit Varma]: and did you want to be a historian or did history happen to you after you decided you
[Amit Varma]: want to do this book?
[Guest]: You know, history happened because of the stories, you know, as I've said before, I
[Guest]: think, in one of your earlier episodes, and I recently wrote an essay about it, about
[Guest]: my great-great-grandparents, who were both divorcees in the 1880s, both members of this,
[Guest]: you know, so-called high caste Sanskritic universe, you know, both are very well educated.
[Guest]: They were both from landlord families and so on.
[Guest]: And you would imagine, at least my textbooks gave me the impression that, you know, people
[Guest]: like this were patriarchal families.
[Guest]: There was no concept of divorce.
[Guest]: On the other hand, only widowhood could end a marriage for a woman.
[Guest]: But, you know, then I'd go back to Kerala and discover that the opposite was the case
[Guest]: with my great-great-grandmother.
[Guest]: She was not only a divorcee in her teens, really, she got married, I think, at 13 the
[Guest]: first time.
[Guest]: She got pregnant.
[Guest]: She was deeply in love with her husband, who was a Brahmin, which again, you know, it's
[Guest]: an inter-caste union, which is where Brahmin men could marry Naira women back in the day.
[Guest]: And she got pregnant.
[Guest]: It was a female child, but it was a stillbirth.
[Guest]: So when this poor Brahmin came afterwards to collect his wife and child and take them
[Guest]: to his place, Raman's mother-in-law stopped him at the threshold and said, you know, the
[Guest]: baby was a girl, and because the baby died, there's something wrong with you.
[Guest]: It's a little bit like in North India, women are blamed for the children they produce.
[Guest]: If they produce female children, you know, it's not considered a good thing, at least
[Guest]: in very many rural orthodox families.
[Guest]: Whereas here, it was the other way around.
[Guest]: The man was blamed for, you know, having a dead baby girl, because in a matrilineal family,
[Guest]: the death of a female child is considered a bad woman.
[Guest]: So the husband was told to go back, never come back, and the marriage was dissolved.
[Guest]: And even when we were kids, there was a stone there where, you know, we were often told
[Guest]: that he sat on that stone and he wept for an hour before he left.
[Guest]: And some 33 years later, when he was dying, he was on his deathbed.
[Guest]: He actually sent a servant to express the desire to meet this first wife of his after
[Guest]: over three decades.
[Guest]: She didn't go, but three of her children actually went and met him.
[Guest]: And I thought this was a fascinating thing that, you know, you're not only a divorce
[Guest]: in the 1880s, your first husband dies three decades later, and your children go to meet
[Guest]: your their mother's first husband, and the second husband agrees to let his children
[Guest]: go and meet his wife's first husband and things like that, completely challenged everything
[Guest]: I had been reading in my textbooks growing up in Maharashtra.
[Guest]: I'm sure in Kerala, people are slightly more aware of this if they grow up there.
[Guest]: But for me, I think, you know, listening to stories like this was my first introduction
[Guest]: to the matrilineal system.
[Guest]: And I was always struck that, you know, this needed some kind of a wider dissemination.
[Guest]: There was a lot of scholarly work on it.
[Guest]: There is a lot of feminist work on the matrilineal system.
[Guest]: But I thought someone needs to disseminate it to a larger audience.
[Amit Varma]: So is it fair to say that your desire to write the book came partly because no one had written
[Amit Varma]: this and you wanted to write it in a sense, because this is a book you would have wanted
[Guest]: to read?
[Guest]: You know, I mean, I was doing a lot of reading on Kerala history, you know, I was doing a
[Guest]: lot of reading on academic books and you know, historical work, etc.
[Guest]: Somewhere in 2018, I came across the name of Sethu Lakshmibai, who's the protagonist
[Guest]: of the ivory throne.
[Guest]: And I thought, you know, there's only one photograph of her with a little daughter in
[Guest]: that picture, which I could find online.
[Guest]: In all the history books, she's mentioned briefly, but then very quickly people move
[Guest]: on to the next ruler.
[Guest]: And I discovered that, you know, all these rulers, there was a lot of general, you know,
[Guest]: all about everybody was very much about how they were good for development, how they were
[Guest]: all very progressive and simple and so on, and not like your usual image of an Indian
[Guest]: Maharaja.
[Guest]: Of course, slightly exaggerated that they were so simple.
[Guest]: They weren't.
[Guest]: They were royalty.
[Guest]: Royalty is never all that simple.
[Guest]: But I was always curious as to why this lady was sort of footnoted, why she never made
[Guest]: it to that kind of a mainstream recognizability in terms of public intervention in Kerala
[Guest]: elsewhere.
[Guest]: Nobody really, they vaguely knew her name, but they didn't know what happened to her.
[Guest]: And most mysteriously, she had a little girl in that photograph.
[Guest]: There was one article in the Hindu back in 2008, which had this photo of her and this
[Guest]: little baby girl.
[Guest]: And I kept thinking it's the matrilineal system.
[Guest]: So that girl's descendants are members of the ex-royal family of Travancore, where did
[Guest]: they disappear because they didn't live in Trivandrum.
[Guest]: The family that lived in Trivandrum was another branch from Sethu Lakshmibai's sister, Sethu
[Guest]: Parvati Bai, who is the, let's say, antagonist of the book.
[Amit Varma]: Junior Rani.
[Guest]: So it's Senior Rani and Junior Rani.
[Guest]: So what happened to the Senior Rani's family?
[Guest]: So you know, the moment I started asking questions about Sethu Lakshmibai, I started asking other
[Guest]: people, you know, what happened to this lady, a lot of elders, including a great uncle in
[Guest]: my family, who's now 99 years old, he said, oh, you know, if you ask questions about that,
[Guest]: you're going to stumble on a lot of mischievous material.
[Guest]: You shouldn't go down that route.
[Guest]: It's not a good story.
[Guest]: And actually, when you're 18 years old, and you're told not to do something, you're obviously
[Guest]: going to do the exact opposite and start digging up what you're not supposed to dig up.
[Guest]: So I think that's how I started asking questions.
[Guest]: And initially, I came across some material, I got in touch over Facebook with one of her
[Guest]: family members, they sent me a book they privately published, containing all her letters and
[Guest]: private papers.
[Guest]: And once they sent this to me, I was fascinated by the story, fascinated by the tragedy really
[Guest]: in many ways, and even by her personality, you know, the kind of life arc she had.
[Guest]: And I wrote, I think at that time with a basic sort of reading with some books and this material
[Guest]: from the letters, etc.
[Guest]: I got, I wrote a blog, I had, you know, in 2008, it was the age of blogs.
[Guest]: And I had a blog that perhaps five people read, five people I knew, who were also interested
[Guest]: in Kerala history.
[Guest]: But this particular article about her talking about her somewhat tragic life and career,
[Guest]: and the way it ended on a very sad note, it brought me this barrage of trolling in 2008.
[Guest]: 2008 trolling wasn't a big deal.
[Guest]: But suddenly, there was like a heap of messages, comments under this blog saying, how dare
[Guest]: you write this?
[Guest]: This is all lies.
[Guest]: This is impossible.
[Guest]: And one even rather casteist remark by one man saying, you know, we were kings back in
[Guest]: the day, who belongs to that royal community, not the family, saying, you know, back in
[Guest]: the day, if you'd have written something like this, your head would have been chopped off.
[Guest]: And I was like, you know, at 18, I was like, my God, what is it about this woman that triggers
[Guest]: such, you know, animosity and hatred?
[Guest]: Why is it that telling her story as it is, seems to provoke so much angst and hate from
[Guest]: all these unknown people I've never met on the internet, and who had never come to my
[Guest]: blog before they heard that there was such an article on her.
[Guest]: That's when I started deciding that, you know, I had decided to sort of start digging up
[Guest]: her story a little more, you know, discovering more details, trying to find out what exactly
[Guest]: the story was.
[Guest]: And that started really in 2009, and took me to 2015 to finish the ivory throne.
[Amit Varma]: And did you decide at that point that you're going to write a book or was it just no, I
[Guest]: was more interested in looking up the story.
[Guest]: But somewhere along the way turned into a book because I realized there was no book
[Guest]: on her.
[Guest]: I mean, her granddaughter published this book of letters and so on.
[Guest]: But there was no biography as it were, there was no Travancore history written in a revisionist
[Guest]: style.
[Guest]: You know, most people may not know that, you know, in North India, for example, other parts
[Guest]: of India, Travancore history is not really something you think about.
[Guest]: But in Kerala, it's a pretty big deal, because that was Kerala's premier princely state.
[Guest]: It had a major role in the culture and in the political evolution of the state, a lot
[Guest]: of the parties, you know, the rise of communism, etc.
[Guest]: It's linked to a great extent to Travancore and the policies of the last Diwan of Travancore.
[Guest]: So Travancore was a big deal in Kerala history.
[Guest]: So I was just, you know, keen to sort of fill this gap where this lady was concerned.
[Guest]: And that I think, I think I wrote my first draft of the book by 2011-12.
[Guest]: And frankly, at that time, I thought it was ready to publish.
[Guest]: I'm glad I didn't because it would have been a hideous book that would have sunk without
[Guest]: a trace.
[Guest]: So it took another three and a half years to, you know, get to beat it into shape to
[Guest]: get more material to really research and put the pieces together, which took me to, you
[Guest]: know, there's material from America, which I couldn't find in India for there's this
[Guest]: obscure magazine that I was looking for a journal that covered specifically the princely
[Guest]: states, which was a massive source of information, because every two weeks, they had material
[Guest]: on different princely states and what was happening, couldn't find it in India couldn't
[Guest]: find it in Britain finally ended up finding it in America.
[Guest]: And, you know, I had to spend a bomb to acquire that material, a lot from the British archives,
[Guest]: then from the Delhi archives, the Kerala state archives, interviews with lots of people,
[Guest]: you know, because the protagonist and the antagonist both died in the 1980s, which meant
[Guest]: that people who knew them, their children, they were still alive at that time.
[Guest]: So I had to go talk to them, you know, and it was interesting to sort of go through that
[Guest]: journey for five, six years, and put together the story.
[Guest]: Since then, you know, that book has not only filled a gap, I think, to my great advantage
[Guest]: in terms of sales, etc.
[Guest]: Anytime anybody looks up Kerala on Amazon, or Flipkart or whatever, this is the first
[Guest]: book that pops up.
[Guest]: Because there hasn't been a big mainstream book on Kerala for a very long time.
[Guest]: There are academic books, there are books in Kerala, but for a larger pan Indian English
[Guest]: reading audience, there hasn't been that much for a very long time.
[Guest]: So anybody who now wants a book on Kerala history, this sort of shows up as the first
[Guest]: option they have.
[Guest]: And that's great for me in terms of sales.
[Guest]: And I'm glad that the book helped resurrect Setulakshmi Bai and put her back in public
[Amit Varma]: imagination, because she deserves to be there.
[Amit Varma]: And the book's also been optioned, I believe, for a potential web series.
[Guest]: People keep saying film, but I think it's too big to be a film.
[Guest]: The drama is far too intense to cover it in one two hour film, it'll end up being a shoddy
[Amit Varma]: job if it's a film, I think, I can't really do justice to the story.
[Amit Varma]: And in contrast with the books you've spoken about in our previous episodes, but the ones
[Amit Varma]: that you wrote after this, there are no marauding elephants, there are runaway elephants in
[Amit Varma]: one scene where somebody goes to a function and the elephants have run away.
[Amit Varma]: But there is much less bloodshed, but perhaps more human drama.
[Amit Varma]: So did you want to be a historian before you actually set upon this quest or did setting
[Guest]: upon this quest naturally make you a historian?
[Guest]: Yeah, I think it's the second way, which is that, you know, once I started the book, once
[Guest]: I started doing my research, it also coincided with my master's degree in London, the fact
[Guest]: of the matter was that I only persuaded my parents to let me go there because I wanted
[Guest]: the archives.
[Guest]: And you can't really tell your parents that, you know, you want them to spend a bomb and
[Guest]: send you abroad, if you write a book, no parent in India is going to allow that.
[Guest]: So what was interesting was research methods, we were taught for my master's program for
[Guest]: the thesis, you know, how to understand the archives, how to negotiate libraries and so
[Guest]: on, I could apply that almost immediately to my own research.
[Guest]: And once I started doing that, you know, I had another career that I used to work in
[Guest]: Parliament first, then I worked in the British Parliament for a while, then I worked with
[Guest]: the BBC for a while.
[Guest]: But it was the book and then the success of the book that really got me thinking and I
[Guest]: was like, you know, this is something I'm passionate about.
[Guest]: I am interested in history, I enjoy the research, I enjoy sitting in archives and libraries
[Guest]: and discovering, you know, things and I enjoy also, I think, bringing to the fore marginalized
[Guest]: stories, all the, both my first and my second book, they're both about, you know, either
[Guest]: figures who are marginalized or a region that is marginalized that doesn't get the attention
[Guest]: it perhaps deserves in terms of Indian history, as we talk in general.
[Guest]: So I think that triggered this desire to keep focusing on history.
[Guest]: And now I've taken the plunge, now I've become a full time writer and, you know, researcher.
[Guest]: So now there's no escaping with the consequences of what I have brought upon myself.
[Guest]: So far it's worked out, but I'm under no impression that this, you know, you never know what the
[Guest]: future holds.
[Guest]: Three successful books does not mean that your fourth or fifth or sixth will always
[Guest]: be a successful book seem to be prepared for the worst, but I've decided to take that gamble
[Amit Varma]: and you know, take that risk.
[Amit Varma]: No, in fact, whenever the subject of you has come up in my conversations with other people,
[Amit Varma]: all of them basically have the tone of how dare that scoundrel write three books before
[Amit Varma]: the age of 30.
[Amit Varma]: Has he even started shaving?
[Amit Varma]: How do older historians respond to what in their eyes must be this young kid just coming
[Amit Varma]: up and churning out book after book?
[Guest]: You know, older historians have strangely been very generous.
[Guest]: Actually one advantage is that, look at the books now, the first one won the Sahitya Academy
[Guest]: is Yuva Purushkar.
[Guest]: It was given by a panel of very distinguished scholars.
[Guest]: And two years later, I actually ran into one of the jury members who told me who I was
[Guest]: up against.
[Guest]: And I'm not allowed to name the person.
[Guest]: But it was very flattering to discover that, you know, I won despite that person being
[Guest]: in the list and in the running for the award.
[Guest]: Second book was not only, you know, critically acclaimed, it was also reviewed glowingly
[Guest]: in a peer reviewed academic journal.
[Guest]: For me, I'm doing my PhD now, you know, I, although I want to bridge the academic world
[Guest]: with a larger audience, you always have this fear, you know, are you are you somehow diluting
[Guest]: historical research?
[Guest]: Are you somehow are you doing it in the way academics do it, etc.
[Guest]: So it's good to be in a peer reviewed academic journal, because that means that your work
[Amit Varma]: is passed.
[Guest]: And this was Rebel Sultans.
[Guest]: This was Rebel Sultans in a journal called Studies in History.
[Guest]: And it was reviewed by University of Illinois professor and I was actually taken aback.
[Guest]: I had no idea.
[Guest]: There was University of Illinois professor reading my work.
[Guest]: And even the praise, for example, on Rebel Sultans, the first book doesn't have any endorsements
[Guest]: from any big names, because that's not something I wanted at that time.
[Guest]: The second book, my publishers were keen.
[Guest]: So I said, look, you reach out to whoever you're interested in.
[Guest]: So we reached out to Muzaffar Alam, and he is a very senior scholar, you know, essentially
[Guest]: the, you know, the big name of North Indian history and Mughal history and even the Deccan.
[Guest]: He's worked a lot with Sanjay Subramanian.
[Guest]: And you know, you discover, he basically came back saying he was working on something, so
[Guest]: he wouldn't have time to go through the manuscript.
[Guest]: And then, I'm not exaggerating, a day before we went to press, he emailed back saying he'd
[Guest]: managed to read the manuscript, and he would love to give her an endorsement for the book.
[Guest]: For me, that was a great, you know, I felt really not only honored, but also somewhat
[Guest]: more confident, because it's not easy for a Muzaffar Alam to sort of endorse your work.
[Guest]: He's a very senior scholar.
[Guest]: He's not the type to take, you know, careless only or lazily written history very seriously.
[Guest]: So that meant he appreciated it.
[Guest]: Then my publisher told me that they ran into Rudraksha Mukherjee, who was also a very big
[Guest]: historian.
[Guest]: He appreciated the book.
[Guest]: And now for the paperback edition, I think he's giving us an endorsement as well.
[Guest]: So I think for me, having these big historians sort of support my work and encourage it is
[Guest]: something I value a great deal.
[Guest]: And I think it, going see, you always make mistakes, you're always, you're always learning
[Guest]: none of your works.
[Guest]: I think no historian can confidently say their work is 100% solid.
[Guest]: You're always learning things are always going to be minor errors and omissions and slips
[Guest]: and so on.
[Guest]: But you keep improving.
[Guest]: So I think it's good to have older historians sort of support that.
[Guest]: What where some opposition has come, interestingly, from some of my contemporaries.
[Guest]: So a lot of my PhD colleagues in London, most of them, I mean, the ones from India, at least,
[Guest]: they sort of frown upon this.
[Guest]: I don't know if it's a case of sour grapes, or if it's simply because, you know, they're
[Guest]: like, no, no, no, you can't do this popular history thing.
[Guest]: It's a bad idea.
[Guest]: You know, academia is where you can do it soberly, properly, this making it engaging
[Guest]: through writing and turn it into a storytelling process is very risky, it's fraught with lots
[Guest]: of problems.
[Guest]: And I agree, it's fraught with problems.
[Guest]: But as you may have noticed, with the first and the second, the third, not so much, but
[Guest]: the first and the second, it's rich with footnotes, I make sure that all my sources, the footnotes
[Guest]: themselves sometimes have essay length material in them, because I'm not trying to sort of
[Guest]: cut down on the academic aspect of it.
[Guest]: If you read the footnotes, it almost reads like it's part of an academic book.
[Guest]: It's just the main narrative that I try and make attractive in terms of writing.
[Guest]: Some people of my age perhaps disapprove.
[Guest]: But you know, because the older scholars who've established themselves and won their stripes
[Guest]: and you know, earned their place up there, they've been supportive so far.
[Guest]: And for me, I think that is, you know, it's a it's a it's a mark of confidence.
[Guest]: Therefore, even though my contemporaries may sometimes, you know, rant about me on Facebook,
[Guest]: I can see it, right?
[Guest]: I can see that they like, you know, how they do this and things like that.
[Guest]: But you know, I think it's good to know that older people support you.
[Guest]: So it gives you the strength and the conviction to carry on.
[Amit Varma]: And also, I don't really get the thing against popular history.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, the thing is, as long as the history is solid, why should it be a mark against
[Amit Varma]: it if it's written very well, and therefore sells very well?
[Guest]: You know, it's an Indian thing.
[Guest]: Here, we don't have that much popular history by academics, in the Western world, they always
[Guest]: do it.
[Guest]: Now, for example, the same people who say that you should not be doing popular history.
[Guest]: Sunil Khilnani is an academic, you know, he has a PhD, he used to be the head of the India
[Guest]: Institute in London, which is where I'm doing my PhD now.
[Guest]: Now he's moved back to an American university.
[Guest]: He wrote this iconic book called the idea of India in the late 1990s.
[Guest]: He also did a book and I was his research assistant for that project called Incarnations,
[Guest]: India through 50 lives.
[Guest]: So it's 50 personalities, you've taken their profiles, and you've tried to explain a broader
[Guest]: Indian history through that.
[Guest]: Now, neither he nor I are scholars on each of these people.
[Guest]: I mean, you're taking a VK Krishnamenon, for example, you're taking a Buddha, for example,
[Guest]: I'm not a Buddhist studies person, neither is he.
[Guest]: We're not great scholars on Krishnamenon, neither is, you know, Dr. Khilnani.
[Guest]: But the thing is, that does not preclude us from being able to sort of do a decent amount
[Guest]: of research on it and write about it.
[Guest]: The argument that you have to be like a supreme expert on everything you touch is I think
[Guest]: risky because that I mean, it doesn't hold water, Western academics, and he works in
[Guest]: the Western world, which is why for them, also doing popular history is not at all a
[Guest]: surprising thing.
[Guest]: I mean, right now, there's Supriya Gandhi, who's just brought out a book on Dara Shukla,
[Guest]: the tragic Mughal prince, and a lot of what ifs and you know, romantic stories around
[Guest]: Dara Shukla.
[Guest]: And she's done at least from every, you know, bit I've read so far, she's done a very good
[Guest]: job of negotiating that inaccessible, attractive language.
[Guest]: So the thing is, Western academics and people in the Western world make the effort to do
[Guest]: popular history.
[Guest]: Here, however, academics have not, I think, reached out that much into the popular audience.
[Guest]: And another crop of historians has grown up who want to proactively touch and reach the
[Guest]: popular mass.
[Guest]: And there's that break, therefore, which naturally, you know, breeds its own insecurities and
[Guest]: competition and rivalries and so on.
[Guest]: Historians are also human beings.
[Guest]: It's not like we are about ego clashes and jealousies and rivalries and fears and things
[Guest]: like that.
[Guest]: That's very much a part of anything, any human enterprise.
[Guest]: And that, I think, exists more in India now.
[Guest]: But, you know, as more and more historians do make the effort, academic historians do
[Guest]: make the effort to write for a lay audience, I think it's a constructive thing.
[Guest]: On the one hand, you can't complain that history is being perverted by politicians, on the other
[Guest]: hand, do nothing about it.
[Guest]: And if you want to convince the masses, go out to the masses, go out to the intelligent
[Guest]: reading audience, you know, go out and reach out beyond your seminar circuit.
[Guest]: I think there is value in that.
[Guest]: I think, you know, the fighting for good history happens at different levels.
[Guest]: It's not merely about, you know, sitting in the seminar circuit and issuing papers that
[Guest]: you and I will read, but not anybody beyond that.
[Guest]: That has its value.
[Guest]: It is from that that people like me benefit.
[Guest]: We learn a great deal from that, but someone has to also connect it for people who are
[Guest]: not reading the seminar papers.
[Amit Varma]: And also so much of the politics of the present and indeed so much of the present period is
[Amit Varma]: influenced by narratives about the past, which makes it all the more important that we examine
[Amit Varma]: those more deeply and challenge, you know, loosely held assumptions about the past.
[Amit Varma]: And I was sort of just thinking aloud yesterday, and it struck me that, you know, many people
[Amit Varma]: call this current government a conservative government.
[Amit Varma]: But to me, in one sense, they are not conservative, they are radical, because I think what is
[Amit Varma]: inherent in Indian society is the fact that we are so assimilative, we take influences
[Amit Varma]: from everywhere, we are actually incredibly tolerant, and that's almost a DNA of our society.
[Amit Varma]: And that is something that the current government by trying to overturn and by trying to paint
[Amit Varma]: the world in binaries, is actually performing a radical act which goes against what our
[Amit Varma]: society is.
[Amit Varma]: And it struck me again, and I mean, this is a truism, but it struck me again, while reading
[Amit Varma]: your book that Kerala is actually an exemplar of this, in the sense that Kerala was one
[Amit Varma]: probably one of the first globalized places in the world, Christianity came to Kerala
[Amit Varma]: before it hit Europe, as you point out in your book, early Islam came here and it came
[Amit Varma]: here peacefully and the lifetime of the prophet in the lifetime of the prophet.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about a sort of, you know, like, you quote, right up here at the
[Amit Varma]: end, in 1607, he writes, quote, there is no place in all of India, where contentment is
[Amit Varma]: more universal than at Calicut, both on account of the fertility and beauty of the country
[Amit Varma]: and of the intercourse with the men of all religions who live there in free exercise
[Amit Varma]: of their own religion.
[Amit Varma]: It is the busiest and most full of all traffic and commerce in the whole of India.
[Amit Varma]: It has merchants from all parts of the world, and of all nations and religions, by reason
[Amit Varma]: of the liberty and security accorded to them there, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And part of this, obviously, is because it's a port, right, and ports have always attracted
[Guest]: foreigners.
[Guest]: See, the idea of the foreigner as an alien is not something that port cultures or coastal
[Guest]: cultures have in general, because trade is the ecosystem that preserves these societies.
[Guest]: Now look at a lot of this is also linked to geography.
[Guest]: Now Kerala is the sliver of the Indian coast.
[Guest]: It's cut off by the Western Ghats from Tamil Nadu, etc.
[Guest]: It's not easy access.
[Guest]: You can access through Palakkad, which is up north and then in the south there's via
[Guest]: Kanyakumari district.
[Guest]: There's another area, there's another way to access Kerala, or you will access it via
[Guest]: the coast.
[Guest]: But for the most part, Kerala sort of cut out from South Indian, from the peninsula
[Guest]: as it were, which is why even when Vijayanagar was this great, powerful empire in the south
[Guest]: that practically conquered almost all of the empire, it never really conquered Kerala,
[Guest]: because it was Kerala was sort of its own zone.
[Guest]: But it was also a very small area, which meant local economy was not enough to sustain any
[Guest]: kind of grand civilization or any kind of grand, extraordinarily wealthy society.
[Guest]: That wealth came from trade.
[Guest]: It was trade and pepper and calico, calico comes from calicut, fabric, you know, that
[Guest]: kind of trade that actually generated money for Kerala's kings.
[Guest]: Even the idea of kingship in Kerala was very different from Tamil Nadu, North India.
[Guest]: Kings were not kings who had large standing armies and things like that.
[Guest]: Kings headed a network really of feudal lords, again linked to geography.
[Guest]: You know, there are 44 rivers in Kerala.
[Guest]: And we're talking about a time when navigating all this is extremely difficult, you know,
[Guest]: moving around is extremely difficult, which means that a king will only control his capital
[Guest]: and the immediate surroundings and a lot of it is based on feudal levies and things like
[Guest]: that.
[Guest]: Kings are not, I mean, they had land revenue, but they didn't really depend very much on
[Guest]: land revenue, because trade brought them in multiples of what they earned through land.
[Guest]: So kings had an incentive to promote trade, which meant what promoting new people, new
[Guest]: colors of people, new people of different faiths.
[Guest]: There are no issues with that because their livelihood depended on it.
[Guest]: And none of this comes from entirely like noble thoughts.
[Guest]: It comes because you have gains from it.
[Guest]: So Arabs, the zamorin of Calicut builds, you know, builds up the city of Calicut, which
[Guest]: becomes one of the great cities of the trading world.
[Guest]: One of the reasons is that other rivals of his have Cologne and other places where the
[Guest]: Jews and the Christians are dominant.
[Guest]: The Arabs are sort of looking for a place.
[Guest]: That's when the Calicut is emerging as a new ruler.
[Guest]: And he says, hold on, you know, I've got this access to the sea, I'll give you very good
[Guest]: terms of trade.
[Guest]: I'll give you honesty.
[Guest]: I won't cheat you.
[Guest]: I'll give you a very overall make up a setting that invites trade and commerce to the city.
[Guest]: And that formula works.
[Guest]: The Arabs start gravitating towards this, the Chinese start gravitating towards it.
[Guest]: And it's based on certain conditions that the city thrives.
[Guest]: Naturally, there is a cultural impact on the area itself altogether.
[Guest]: The Chinese bring in, the Malayalis eat, we cook a lot of our food in what we call China
[Guest]: Chatti.
[Guest]: China is China.
[Guest]: It's the kind of utensil that came from China.
[Guest]: There are these legends in Kerala where there's this Nambudiri Brahmin, for example, called
[Guest]: Pandampurathu Namburi and how he, you know, keeps a Chinese merchant's treasure safe for
[Guest]: a very long time and how the Chinese merchant is very happy.
[Guest]: So you're meeting a Chinese foreigner with a Kerala Orthodox Nambudiri Brahmin in one
[Guest]: of Kerala's oldest legends because the foreigner is always present in Kerala's legends.
[Guest]: Islam is present to the extent that there is this wonderful story called Parai Pettapandirukulam,
[Guest]: which is the, it's about a Dalit woman, a Paraya woman, practically one of the lowest
[Guest]: castes who marries the sage Vararuchi through this adventure of their own.
[Guest]: And they have 12 children.
[Guest]: The 12 children includes one daughter from which a major matrilineal Naya family is descended,
[Guest]: the Kalapara Mupil Nayas, but it also includes a Brahmin, the Meratola Agnihotri.
[Guest]: It also includes a carpenter called Perindachan.
[Guest]: It also includes a Dalit man who actually brings, every time the siblings meet for feast,
[Guest]: this is the man who brings beef, the udders of a cow to this feast, to where a Brahmin
[Guest]: brother and the woman and all are present.
[Guest]: There's also a Muslim son and there's a son who's a deity.
[Guest]: So these 12 children represent different castes, different religions even, and different ways
[Guest]: of life.
[Guest]: There's orthodox Brahminical vegetarian life.
[Guest]: There is somebody who eats the udders of a cow.
[Guest]: Everybody's represented in that one story of a Brahmin man and a Paraya woman producing
[Guest]: the 12 castes and the 12 children and so on.
[Guest]: These legends are basically hinting at something of great value.
[Guest]: There are texts like the Kerala Olpatti, which is considered the premier text that explains
[Guest]: the origins of Kerala.
[Guest]: It's not really a historically sound text.
[Guest]: It was written somewhere in the 17th century.
[Guest]: Some say even in the 18th century.
[Guest]: There's already foreign wars referred to in that with the Portuguese and people like that,
[Guest]: depending on which version of the Kerala Olpatti you read.
[Guest]: The oldest political legend of Kerala is about this king called Cheraman Perumal, who converts
[Guest]: to Islam and goes off to Mecca.
[Guest]: So you know, in the oldest political legend of Kerala, there is already Islam and there's
[Guest]: already Arabia.
[Guest]: So this is the ecosystem in which it works.
[Guest]: It was easier to cross the Arabian Sea and reach Kerala than for a Malayali to travel
[Guest]: by land all the way to Kashi or wherever else in North India.
[Guest]: The sea made access to other countries easier than it did to other parts of the Indian subcontinent.
[Guest]: So that is why Kerala evolved its own culture.
[Guest]: The funny thing is, despite exposure with all these foreigners, it retained many of
[Guest]: its original tribalistic elements also.
[Guest]: A lot of tribal gods have survived, our Kava culture, the groves have survived with what
[Guest]: are essentially pre-Brahmin, pre-Sanskritic gods.
[Guest]: The matrilineal system survived.
[Guest]: For some reason, despite all this exposure to patriarchal families and patriarchal religions
[Guest]: and travelers and traders, matrilinealism stuck very strong in the royal families in
[Guest]: the landed communities of Kerala and even in some very prominent lower caste groups.
[Guest]: So you know, Kerala retained some sense of its independent identity.
[Guest]: It retained a certain, you know, image of itself, all the same, constantly interacting
[Guest]: with the world.
[Guest]: For me, it's a great example.
[Guest]: For example, right now, we're thinking about Indianness, right?
[Guest]: There are ways to retain your Hinduness, there are ways to retain your Sanskriticness, there's
[Guest]: ways to retain your Indianness, as it were, within whatever cultural parameters you're
[Guest]: comfortable with, but also to engage with the world without feeling like it's some kind
[Guest]: of threat, without feeling that foreign ideas and foreigners and anything that comes from
[Guest]: outside is a bad thing.
[Guest]: You can do both.
[Guest]: It's not an either or, you know, our history is full of the and factor.
[Guest]: It's both.
[Amit Varma]: You don't need to choose.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, I had a great episode a year and a half back with Vikram Doctor on Indian food,
[Amit Varma]: which is basically about how all Indian food essentially came from outside.
[Amit Varma]: There's very little that is originally Indian and yet all of it is Indian.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, sure.
[Amit Varma]: It came from outside, but we made it our own.
[Amit Varma]: And a couple of thoughts strike me from what you just said.
[Amit Varma]: One is the mistake I often make and I caution others against making is thinking of India
[Amit Varma]: as that mental, you know, you have that mental map in your head that, oh, this is India.
[Amit Varma]: And there in the south, there's Tamil Nadu, Kerala, and these are all parts of this whole.
[Amit Varma]: But as you point out, you know, this mental map is a relatively recent construction.
[Amit Varma]: You actually have a Kerala if you look at it geographically, which is separated from
[Amit Varma]: the rest of what we now call India.
[Amit Varma]: And as you point out, it's more plausible for a lot of trade to happen over the seas
[Amit Varma]: than say for a Kerala Hindu to go to Kashi.
[Amit Varma]: The other important thing that this syncreticness of Kerala illustrates to me is the value of
[Amit Varma]: globalization and free markets that they lead to an open society necessarily.
[Amit Varma]: Because you know, if you are trading in a free market, it is in your interest to trade
[Amit Varma]: with as wide an economic network as you can, you will discriminate less, which is not to
[Amit Varma]: say not at all, but you will discriminate less, you will be more open.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, that's the key to an open society, you cannot have an open society without also
[Amit Varma]: having open trade and free markets.
[Amit Varma]: But it's interesting that despite all of this, another thing that comes through very strongly
[Amit Varma]: in your writing and in the ivory throne, is that despite this openness and this globalization
[Amit Varma]: and all of the and even the matrilineal nature of society, which we'll discuss after this,
[Amit Varma]: there are these very stark divisions, which are most clearly exemplified in the solidity
[Amit Varma]: and the rigidity of the caste system, which is perhaps in many ways worse in Kerala than
[Amit Varma]: other parts of India.
[Amit Varma]: What explains that contradiction?
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a bit about it.
[Guest]: You know, Kerala was called famously the lunatic asylum of India by Swami Vivekananda, he knew
[Guest]: caste, he had seen the caste system.
[Guest]: And then he came to Kerala where he saw not only untouchability, but also things like
[Guest]: unapproachability.
[Guest]: There are distances certain castes had to keep from other castes, which are superior
[Guest]: castes, because even their shadow, even their breath, even passing nearby could pollute
[Amit Varma]: these.
[Amit Varma]: I think you pointed out some castes cannot get within 90 meters of a Brahmin and 50 meters
[Guest]: of a Nair.
[Guest]: Yeah, there are there are rules like that about all of these things.
[Guest]: There's even in some parts of Kerala, I think in my, where my family comes from, this caste
[Guest]: doesn't exist.
[Guest]: But there is a caste that was only allowed to come out at night, they're not allowed
[Guest]: to see daylight and be seen by other people during the daylight, because even seeing them
[Guest]: no matter what distance can can pollute you.
[Guest]: So there's this kind of chaos and you know, madness also in Kerala society.
[Guest]: You find this in some ways, I think part of it is also because of waves of immigration.
[Guest]: Now, Kerala legend from the beginning says that Kerala is a country of immigrants.
[Guest]: So the story is Parashuram brought all the Brahmins here and gave this land to the Brahmins.
[Guest]: But at first the Brahmins had to discover that the land was completely occupied by ferocious
[Guest]: Nagas.
[Guest]: Now you can read that as serpents or you can read that as local tribes.
[Guest]: And these Nagas would then push these Brahmins out, the Brahmins had to come back again and
[Guest]: then make peace with the Nagas, except and why is it that all Kerala houses have grooves
[Guest]: like in the house, one corner will be set apart in the compound as a groove, where it's
[Guest]: allowed to run wild and anything is allowed to grow and there'll be a Naga statue in that.
[Guest]: It's some kind of an old God that existed and the Brahmins basically accepted that God.
[Guest]: So as the waves of immigrants come in, you find an increasing amount of temple construction.
[Guest]: That's how a region that was largely forests and not agrarian yet becomes increasingly
[Guest]: an agrarian society.
[Guest]: That agrarian system seems to have been led by a lot of these upper castes, which is basically
[Guest]: the Brahmins and the Nagas and those who tilted towards the future upper castes.
[Guest]: Agrarian society meant wealth, wealth meant cornering resources and becoming more powerful,
[Guest]: which meant that people who originally lived there, which is the later Dalit castes of
[Guest]: Kerala, the Kauravas, the Pulayas, the Pulayas were an aggressive slave caste.
[Guest]: But if you talk to them, the older members of the community, this is not written down
[Guest]: anywhere, but they have their legends of Pulaya kings, of Pulaya chieftains, of people who
[Guest]: had forts and so on in their community.
[Guest]: But these were all, I think, forest communities at some point and they were slowly enslaved
[Guest]: as urbanization and agrarianism built up, thanks to the immigrant communities that came
[Guest]: in over different periods of time.
[Guest]: That's how the caste system picks up.
[Guest]: It's different groups that arrived at different times, sort of putting them into different
[Guest]: boxes.
[Guest]: But all the same, the upper castes had a lot to gel with.
[Guest]: For example, in a Brahmin family, only if there are three sons, only the eldest is allowed
[Guest]: to marry a Brahmin woman, because that way you only have one line in which succession
[Guest]: happens in the Brahmin community, which means your property stays intact.
[Guest]: It doesn't get partitioned.
[Guest]: So if all three brothers marry Brahmin women and have Brahmin kids, there are three heirs,
[Guest]: you have to split the property.
[Guest]: So if only the eldest produces a Brahmin heir, the other two brothers marry non-Brahmin
[Guest]: women.
[Guest]: So they go and marry these matrilineal women from matrilineal communities.
[Guest]: So that may be a Kshatriya princess or it may be a Shudra Naya.
[Guest]: Now remember, Shudra does not mean low caste in the sense, Shudra still Sa Varna, which
[Guest]: is in the Varna system.
[Guest]: So Brahmins in Kerala said it was Brahmins, a few upgraded Nayas who wore the sacred thread
[Guest]: as officially Kshatriyas, and then everyone else is a Shudra.
[Guest]: But the Shudras were powerful landed communities.
[Guest]: So they would marry the Shudra women also, with the result that in the next generation,
[Guest]: you may have one son who's the Brahmin, say the temple priest, the second cousin would
[Guest]: have married would it would be the son of this princess or whatever, and the local Raja.
[Guest]: The third brother's son would be the local warlord or Naya chieftain or Naya general
[Guest]: or whatever.
[Guest]: So all three are cousins, they belong to different castes.
[Guest]: One is a Brahmin, one is a Kshatriya, one is the warrior.
[Guest]: And they therefore ensure that that upper caste prerogative and power they have is preserved.
[Guest]: So the caste system was extremely brutal to those who are Avarna, out of that system.
[Guest]: But the Savarnas made sure they were constantly gelling with each other through intermarriage
[Guest]: and through links of not only economic exchange, but also the exchange of blood.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, there's an amusing chapter in the ivory throne about how you mentioned, you
[Amit Varma]: know, upgraded Naya is about how Martandu Varma who sort of resurrected the house of
[Amit Varma]: Travancore as it were, was an upgraded Naya, for respectability, they did various rituals
[Amit Varma]: and all that.
[Guest]: So he could call himself a Kshatriya.
[Guest]: And it's not just him, a lot of, and the funniest is there are, there are families that got
[Guest]: stuck midway, like they were in the process of upgrading and then colonialism hits and
[Guest]: they never quite complete the process.
[Guest]: So usually people think that anybody in Kerala with the surname Varma, you know, your surname
[Guest]: really is a Kshatriya, like who belongs to one of these palace communities.
[Guest]: But there's a gradation within that.
[Guest]: So you have at the beginning, the highest Kshatriya in Kerala is the Cochin Raja because
[Guest]: his sacred thread is the oldest.
[Guest]: In fact, there's this funny story where Martandu Varma has defeated the Cochin Raja and they've
[Guest]: signed a treaty and they, you know, after they've done everything and they go and take
[Guest]: a dip in the pond because in those days, that's a cultural thing, you go and bathe together.
[Guest]: So then they take a dip in the pond and this Martandu Varma looks at the Cochin Raja's
[Guest]: sacred thread and says, it's really filthy, it's all like turned black with dirt.
[Guest]: And he says, you know, can't you clean this, look at mine, it's so pristine and white and
[Guest]: so on.
[Guest]: And the Cochin Raja says, you know, my Poonoola, my sacred thread is a little old as opposed
[Guest]: to yours, which is new.
[Guest]: The idea being that Martandu Varma is just a recent upgrade into the Kshatriya community,
[Guest]: whereas the Cochin Raja has been there for so long that even his sacred thread has turned
[Guest]: dirty.
[Guest]: So there are families like the Cochin Raja.
[Guest]: Then there are later people, for example, the Travenco family and its networks, which
[Guest]: managed to gain the upgrade in the 17th century and the 18th century.
[Guest]: Then there's another family called the Thekumkur and Vadkumkur Varmas.
[Guest]: They have the surname of Varma, but they don't have the sacred thread.
[Guest]: So they've literally been stuck in limbo where they're technically still Nayas, but they've
[Guest]: managed to get the surname of the Kshatriyas.
[Guest]: Then there are lower people like the caste of the Zamorin of Calicut.
[Guest]: The Zamorins never thought it was worthwhile to go through this process.
[Guest]: Everyone tried and decided it was too expensive to try and get the sacred thread.
[Guest]: So they're stuck in another subgroup called Samantas, which are also neither Nayas fully
[Guest]: nor fully Kshatriyas, somewhere stuck in the middle.
[Guest]: So this process is fascinating because there are families you can specifically identify
[Guest]: that tried to upgrade themselves within the last three, three and a half centuries and
[Guest]: got stuck at different positions in the caste system.
[Guest]: The British come and after that, there's no moving up or down.
[Guest]: Then you're stuck because the British are cataloging everything and creating manuals
[Guest]: and so on.
[Guest]: So whatever box you were found in, in the 18th century became your final box.
[Amit Varma]: And the British, of course, are very good at putting you in these boxes for their own
[Unknown]: reasons of classification because they're trying to figure everything out.
[Amit Varma]: And then those boxes will put you in become the fixed narrative and like we've discussed
[Guest]: this in the past.
[Guest]: There is no way to generalize.
[Guest]: For example, you know, you find that a lot of this privilege comes from who can sit and
[Guest]: eat with a Brahmin, for example.
[Guest]: Now Nambudwari Brahmins in Kerala are extremely orthodox.
[Guest]: Now the Zamorin of Calicut does not have a sacred thread.
[Guest]: He's not technically a full Kshatriya, but he has the privilege of eating with Nambudwari.
[Guest]: Nayas in general cannot cook for Nambudwari or feed them or sit and eat with them.
[Guest]: But one particular Naya family, the Kavalapara Mupil Nayar, he has the privilege of eating
[Guest]: with Brahmins.
[Guest]: Now within this there are ranges, a Punul or a sacred thread wearing Kshatriya can sit
[Guest]: next to a Brahmin and eat in the same line.
[Guest]: Someone like the Zamorin can't do what is called Panti Bhojanam.
[Guest]: He can do Sakshi Bhojanam.
[Guest]: Sakshi Bhojanam is to sit in the same room, but not in the same line.
[Guest]: The caste system is so intricate, you know, there are people who can sit with, there are
[Guest]: people who can sit in the same room, there are people who can sit outside, there are
[Guest]: people who are not even allowed on the threshold.
[Guest]: My great-grandfather was a school headmaster.
[Guest]: He had these aggressive laborers who belonged to Dalit communities.
[Guest]: They were not allowed to look at the house, but because of Kerala's educational system
[Guest]: which had built up from the 19th century, there were Puleya Dalit teachers in his school
[Guest]: and every year as the headmaster, he gave a grand feast for people in our house.
[Guest]: And it's fascinating to hear from my grandmother that even in the 40s, the rule was very simple.
[Guest]: All the Nayas could sit in the veranda outside the kitchen area and they would be served
[Guest]: their food there on leaves.
[Guest]: The Christians etc. sat at a lower level because they were not allowed to sit inside the house.
[Guest]: So they sat at a lower level on one of the steps and that's where they would eat.
[Guest]: And the Puleya Dalit teachers, they would be served their food near the house, which
[Guest]: the laborers were not allowed near the house, but because they were teachers they were allowed
[Guest]: near the house, but their food was served in the cow shed.
[Guest]: So the feast is happening in different spaces because each space has a caste-related connotation.
[Guest]: It becomes extremely intricate and extremely complicated in Kerala.
[Guest]: And that, you know, that it also reveals a lot about the caste system.
[Guest]: The received wisdom we have that the caste system was Brahmin, Kshatriya, Vaishya, Shudra
[Guest]: and these were the four castes etc.
[Guest]: There was no such pan-Indian caste system.
[Guest]: Every region, every place, it had its own Jati system.
[Guest]: The Varna system was just a theoretical construct and it was also an instrument of manipulation.
[Guest]: You could bribe Rajas to support various causes by promising them a higher Varna.
[Guest]: And you know, that was it till the British came and looked up these texts and thought
[Guest]: the texts held reality.
[Guest]: These were not considered real categories, you know, for people in their everyday lived
[Guest]: lives.
[Guest]: Their everyday lived lives are much more complex.
[Amit Varma]: And I guess one could say that your location in the caste system could be gauged by your
[Amit Varma]: location while at mealtimes.
[Amit Varma]: Is this stuff that you kind of discovered with this granularity while you were doing
[Amit Varma]: research for your book?
[Amit Varma]: Or is it something that filtered down to you anyway?
[Guest]: I mean,
[Guest]: I was in the course of the book because, you know, once although the book is primarily
[Guest]: about this wonderful feuding, like these feuding sisters of Travancore, these royal women and
[Guest]: that court intrigue and the Darbar politics and all of that and the British and how they
[Guest]: intervene in all this.
[Guest]: In the process, because Sethu Rashmi Bai also ruled, there's policy, there's decisions on
[Guest]: social reform.
[Guest]: Looking up these is what led me into these aspects and I found that it was fascinating.
[Guest]: That's why the book took me six years because I wanted to not only weave in the palace gossip
[Guest]: and all that was happening in a dramatic sense in the palace, but also these larger dynamics
[Guest]: of a changing world.
[Guest]: Because once colonialism came in and independence is approaching, that period is extremely fascinating
[Guest]: between where colonialism is slowly starting to recede and fade and Indian nationalism
[Guest]: is growing.
[Guest]: How are royal families, you know, placed at that time in a very complicated position where
[Guest]: they're not sure which way the future is turning.
[Guest]: So at that time to study things with this greater granularity was, I thought, a very
[Guest]: interesting, you know, prospect.
[Amit Varma]: And what you do very well in your book is that you set up the narrative by talking about
[Amit Varma]: all the tumult in the region we now called Kerala, but, you know, there's Calicut and
[Amit Varma]: there's Cochin and there's Travancore and all that for maybe 300 years before the British
[Amit Varma]: finally come, you know, from the time the Portuguese come to Calicut and they have an
[Amit Varma]: awkward time getting through and then the subsequent battles, Martinda Verma, you know,
[Amit Varma]: and more part of Verma's reviving the fate of Travancore and then colonialism coming
[Amit Varma]: in and everything kind of settling down to this default thing where the British are now
[Amit Varma]: in charge.
[Amit Varma]: Just take me through a little bit of the tumult of that period.
[Guest]: You know, it is a very bloody period in the sense that colonialism, so we were talking
[Guest]: about the Arab traders in Calicut and so on.
[Guest]: They had a wonderful equation going on for a long time.
[Guest]: Then you find that the Chinese withdraw from the international seas, which is a huge thing.
[Guest]: It's not given its due.
[Guest]: But if the Chinese had continued to be in the Arabian Sea, their ships were 10 times
[Guest]: larger than these European ships.
[Guest]: The Chinese had the capacity to kick Europeans back to Europe and, you know, retain control
[Guest]: of the Arabian Sea and trade in general.
[Amit Varma]: And were they interested in colonizing others like the Europeans were or were they just
[Guest]: happy to trade?
[Guest]: I think they were happy to trade.
[Guest]: They had a few outposts here and there and they had a certain, let's say, network of
[Amit Varma]: influence.
[Amit Varma]: So the whole history of the subcontinent would have been very different.
[Guest]: The Chinese had remained, but the Chinese became isolationist for some, their own internal
[Guest]: reasons at that time.
[Guest]: So the Chinese withdrew.
[Guest]: So it was left, the seas were left only to the Arabs.
[Guest]: Now you have the Europeans coming in with their new technologies and their new angst
[Guest]: to sort of take charge of it.
[Guest]: They try and come and negotiate with these land rulers in Kerala, but they find that
[Guest]: they can't beat these rulers on land.
[Guest]: And the rulers have a good deal with the Arabs.
[Guest]: So why should they entertain these white men from what they think is a barbaric country?
[Guest]: They thought the Portuguese were barbaric.
[Guest]: You know, that's what the Zamorin thought.
[Guest]: He thought of them as barbarians.
[Guest]: It's only later that colonizers started calling Indians barbarians.
[Guest]: First it was the other way around.
[Guest]: Then these guys discover that they actually have more power at sea.
[Guest]: The Portuguese and the Europeans in general.
[Guest]: So they start, you know, essentially it's piracy and terrorism at sea.
[Guest]: They start sinking ships.
[Guest]: They start preventing trade from happening.
[Guest]: They start playing party pooper till these Rajas are forced to come to the table.
[Guest]: Now this unleashes a whole set of new dynamics because now what's happening is the old powers
[Guest]: like the Zamorin and his networks with the Arabs, they start fading and these European
[Guest]: companies come up.
[Guest]: And the European companies have an active interest in promoting smaller, less ambitious
[Guest]: rulers like the Zamorin, using them as puppets and building up their own profile in Kerala.
[Guest]: That's where you find the Kochi Raja comes up.
[Guest]: The Kochi Raja's career for the last five centuries has always been, has entirely been
[Guest]: being the puppet in the hands of one European company or the other.
[Guest]: The crown of Kochi, which is now kept in a palace in Tripunathara in a museum.
[Guest]: If you look at the crown, there's the emblem of the Dutch East India Company on it because
[Guest]: they made the crown and gave it to the Kochi Raja.
[Guest]: Even his crown is inscribed with the company's logo and a logo because he's not entirely
[Guest]: free.
[Guest]: Now what happens in the south of Kerala, which is, you know, Travancore at that time is essentially
[Guest]: a political backwater.
[Guest]: It's a small sliver between Kanyakumari and Trivandrum.
[Guest]: Nobody cares very much about it.
[Guest]: The family is not even considered fully Malayali.
[Guest]: They're very exposed to Tamil society.
[Guest]: So they're not considered de facto shuddha Malayalis.
[Guest]: Now this prince discovers that this chaos, to quote from a line from Game of Thrones,
[Guest]: chaos is a ladder.
[Guest]: You can use that to your own advantage.
[Guest]: What does he do?
[Guest]: He starts getting weapons from the East India Company.
[Guest]: The English are still not a major factor.
[Guest]: It's the Dutch by this time, we're talking about the 18th century.
[Guest]: The Portuguese are displaced by the Dutch and now the Dutch are in control and the English
[Guest]: are about to displace the Dutch.
[Guest]: So Marthandu Varma acquires weapons, etc. from the English.
[Guest]: He gets a prisoner of war from the Dutch to come and start training his armies in a modern
[Guest]: Western style.
[Guest]: He starts getting mercenaries from Tamil Nadu and does something unheard of in Kerala, which
[Guest]: is to start conquering territory.
[Guest]: Earlier when kings defeated other kings, they just made them vassals.
[Guest]: They do not conquer.
[Guest]: They do not annex territory.
[Guest]: Very rarely did that happen.
[Guest]: Marthandu makes this his chief political activity and he ends up conquering everything up to
[Guest]: Cochin.
[Guest]: But the timing is also important because suddenly communication is easier.
[Guest]: The earlier hassles that existed, say in the 15th and 16th century, no longer apply in
[Guest]: the 18th century.
[Guest]: Things are moving much faster.
[Guest]: The world is becoming a faster place.
[Guest]: The English companies are facilitating that.
[Guest]: New weapons and technologies are coming in.
[Guest]: New forms of fortification are coming in.
[Guest]: And he's reaching out to people beyond the Kerala ecosystem.
[Guest]: He at one point reaches out to Hyder Ali asking for assistance.
[Guest]: So you know, he builds up a new modern state in a modern changing universe.
[Guest]: He uses the chaos that colonialism and early colonialism is unleashing in the Indian subcontinent
[Guest]: and uses that to his advantage to create the state of Travancore.
[Guest]: That is how he sort of, you know, turns a rather sad declining situation to his advantage,
[Guest]: benefits from it.
[Guest]: Now, the funny thing is he's also a Hindu king with aspirations of his own.
[Guest]: So first he has to upgrade himself in caste because if you read Marthandavarma's story,
[Guest]: what is fascinating is that he was still then first among equals.
[Guest]: Royal blood was not sacred.
[Guest]: His nobility was constantly trying to murder him when he was a prince because they don't
[Guest]: like him.
[Guest]: He decides, therefore, that royal blood must become more sacred.
[Guest]: People must hesitate to drop or sort of stab royalty and, you know, spill their blood.
[Guest]: So he decides that that means your caste has to be upgraded and a certain awe has to be
[Guest]: built around royalty.
[Guest]: All kings do it.
[Guest]: The Delhi Sultans did it.
[Guest]: They use protocol and state and court decorum and culture etc to make yourself look extremely
[Guest]: powerful and extremely, let's say, otherworldly, superhuman in some ways.
[Guest]: So Marthandavarma says I need a caste upgrade.
[Guest]: He gets Brahmins.
[Guest]: Now all the Nabudri Brahmins in Kerala are in northern Kerala.
[Guest]: So he's not, they don't actually live here, but he has to find a way to woo them and give
[Guest]: him a caste upgrade.
[Guest]: The process is the ritual called Hiranyagarbha where they construct a cow made entirely out
[Guest]: of gold.
[Guest]: The king goes in through the cow, sits inside the cow.
[Guest]: They chant mantras of birth.
[Guest]: So and then he emerges from under the tail of the cow and now he's reborn.
[Guest]: He's now reborn as a Kshatriya who can wear the sacred thread, part of the Soma Vamsha
[Guest]: or the house of the moon, etc, etc.
[Guest]: So he gains, first of all, his caste upgrade.
[Guest]: The other thing is once you've got a caste upgrade, you can now no longer let your Nayas
[Guest]: who are technically Shudras, you know, they can't come and touch you and serve you.
[Guest]: So you need Brahmins to come and surround you and sort of have this Brahminical decorous
[Guest]: system around you.
[Guest]: Now, as I said, all the Nabudris are in North Kerala.
[Guest]: So what does he do?
[Guest]: He imports Tamil Brahmins by the thousands into Kerala, gives them various incentives
[Guest]: to come to his state, which is free feeding houses, lots of privileges and benefits, etc.
[Guest]: So the Tamil Brahmins come in and they start surrounding the royal family.
[Guest]: And then he creates a protocol around the royal family, which is even the language used
[Guest]: for royalty has to be highly artificial.
[Guest]: It's essentially like public relations now.
[Guest]: Politicians know that on the one hand, they have to be in touch with the masses, etc.
[Guest]: But the masses must never think of them as ordinary because familiarity breeds content.
[Guest]: So Marthandwarman knows this rule and he's doing this in an 18th century format, which
[Guest]: is that, you know, even as I said, language is artificial.
[Guest]: So when a normal Malayali like myself, when I wake up in the morning, the first thing
[Guest]: we do is palli dekha, which is to brush your teeth.
[Guest]: For royalty, the word is tirumutta vilakka, the cleaning of the royal pearls, because
[Guest]: royalty doesn't have teeth, it has pearls.
[Guest]: You know, when a Raja or a Rani goes for a bath, it is not called a kuli, which is what
[Guest]: we would use as a regular Malayali.
[Guest]: That would be the word.
[Guest]: They go for a palli nirata, the royal frolic in water.
[Guest]: When they eat, it's called amrutheta, which is eating amruth or nectar, you're not eating
[Guest]: normal food.
[Guest]: When they cry, it's called trikandnirvarkuva, you know, the royal like water is emerging
[Guest]: from its eyes and things like that.
[Guest]: Then when the Queen of Travancore gets pregnant, you know, the proclamation is never she's
[Guest]: pregnant.
[Guest]: Pregnancy is not a word you use for Queens and royalty.
[Guest]: The word is tiruvairvanu, the royal womb is occupied.
[Guest]: And then when the Queen delivers the baby, it's tiruvairvazhinu, the royal womb is vacated
[Guest]: because Queens don't do such human things as give birth and get pregnant.
[Guest]: And when a Maharaja of Travancore is on his deathbed, they find a Tamil Brahmin and they
[Guest]: get the Tamil Brahmin to embrace the dying Raja.
[Guest]: What is he doing?
[Guest]: He's handing over his sins to the Brahmin.
[Guest]: So he can get moksha and go straight to, you know, whatever, heaven or whatever.
[Guest]: And the Brahmin is paid 10,000 rupees taken to the border of Travancore and unceremoniously
[Guest]: kicked out to disappear with the sins forever.
[Guest]: And when the king dies, finally, it's called nadni.
[Guest]: He's ended ruling his rule in this nada, this kingdom, he's now moved to the other kingdom,
[Guest]: the heavenly kingdom to rule that.
[Guest]: So even the language is highly artificial vocabularies constructed around the royal
[Guest]: family to reinforce the idea that these people are so special, they're so wonderful, they're
[Guest]: so not like you and me.
[Guest]: That is to be constantly regenerated and constantly done.
[Guest]: The irony is he ends up creating what, and Travancore consciously called itself a Hindu
[Guest]: state in the 19th century, called itself the Hindu state of Travancore.
[Guest]: But how is the Hindu state created with East India Company arms by a Dutch mercenary who
[Guest]: trained its forces by Tamil mercenary armies and by a king who only after he did all this
[Guest]: using all these instruments of modernity, he also used Brahminical culture to Sanskritize
[Guest]: and to make himself the Sanskritic Indian king.
[Guest]: But that Sanskritism was backed by forces that were unleashed by colonialism, just backed
[Guest]: by forces that were entirely modern and vintage and not ancient by any stretch.
[Amit Varma]: It's optics.
[Guest]: It's really positioning.
[Guest]: Using your ancient unbroken pure Kshatriya lineage was a very modern enterprise.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: No.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, you know, talking of these elaborate rituals and all that in your book,
[Amit Varma]: there's a very long description and just reading it made me tired and want to dry myself with
[Amit Varma]: towel of the young Sethu Lakshmibai, I think having a bath and the ritual it involved.
[Amit Varma]: It is so incredibly elaborate.
[Amit Varma]: I think everything would take two hours.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And what kind of strikes me also about Marthand Varma is that he's a very interesting character
[Amit Varma]: in that he seems to combine a medieval brutality with an almost modern sense of real politic.
[Amit Varma]: And so I'll just read out a couple of quotes from your book that give a sense of that because
[Amit Varma]: I found this quite fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: One is, of course, you know, your other books have tons of violence in them.
[Amit Varma]: This one doesn't have so much, but still, this is this is a glimpse.
[Amit Varma]: And what happens after he discovers a conspiracy in his court court soon enough and evidence
[Amit Varma]: fell into the Raja's hands of a conspiracy at court.
[Amit Varma]: He had the Pilamar arrested summarily and presented proof of their perfidy.
[Amit Varma]: In what was unprecedented, instead of chastising the nobles by demoting their powers, but otherwise
[Amit Varma]: leaving them unharmed, Marthand Varma ordered their immediate execution.
[Amit Varma]: Their properties were attached and their women and children sold into slavery with not a
[Amit Varma]: hint of mercy or sympathy and thus perished 42 noble houses of the realm, obliterating
[Amit Varma]: internal opposition from the Raja's path and ringing the death knell of feudalism in the
[Amit Varma]: region.
[Amit Varma]: Stop, quote, very Game of Thrones style.
[Amit Varma]: And the other quote is about when he's dying and you're right, quote, on his death bed
[Amit Varma]: in 1758, he issued seven injunctions for political survival to his heirs.
[Amit Varma]: The most crucial of which was that the friendship existing between the English East India Company
[Amit Varma]: and Travancore should be maintained at any risk, and that full confidence should always
[Amit Varma]: be placed in the support and aid of that honourable association.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And there is a hint of practicality and like, I mean, I don't know whether it comes from
[Amit Varma]: an understanding of what a force the East India Company can be or maybe it's just recognition
[Amit Varma]: that his successors aren't as brilliant and enterprising as him, but it sets a tone for
[Guest]: what is to happen in the centuries to come.
[Guest]: It does, because without the British, the kingdom could not have survived.
[Guest]: You know, the brutality, as you mentioned, is actually quite striking because there are
[Guest]: still fisher families outside Trivandrum.
[Guest]: There are villages where they're called fair fishermen, you know, villages, means fair.
[Guest]: The idea being these people are descended from these upper caste Nair women who Marthandor
[Guest]: sold into slavery.
[Guest]: What did he do?
[Guest]: Why is he doing that?
[Guest]: Because by giving up these women and making them eat with and live with fishermen, you
[Guest]: are forever reducing their caste position.
[Guest]: They can never bounce back from something like that.
[Guest]: Killing a family member, killing all the men, the women can still have babies in that family,
[Guest]: the vamsha still survives.
[Guest]: But you demote them in caste, you completely make them important.
[Guest]: There's no way they can come back and harm you.
[Guest]: There are so many stories.
[Guest]: In fact, there's even a story, if you go to Trivandrum, next to the Padmanabhaswamy temple,
[Guest]: there is this pond called the Padmateertham.
[Guest]: It's a huge pond, massive tank really.
[Guest]: The legend goes that it wasn't originally so big.
[Guest]: Next to that, one of these courtiers had his huge mansion and the way Marthandor, once
[Guest]: he defeats his various enemies, what he does is, it's called kolam thonduga in Malayalam.
[Guest]: You not only destroy the house, you turn that spot into a pond and fill it with water so
[Guest]: that any sign of a house having been there completely disappears from local and public
[Guest]: memory.
[Guest]: So get rid of the lineage, get rid of even the land and the property on which these people
[Guest]: actually lived.
[Guest]: And suddenly these people cease to exist, as far as the future is concerned.
[Guest]: They no longer exist as even a concept for other rebels to rally around and sort of make
[Guest]: them a focus for any kind of rebellion against the king.
[Guest]: You see that even with politicians now.
[Guest]: Why is it that the politicians always want to delegitimize somebody else?
[Guest]: You delegitimize your rival because you have to make sure they become completely important.
[Guest]: Nobody should be able to rally around them because they've been completely sort of stripped
[Guest]: of any kind of legitimacy in the political system.
[Guest]: And I guess painting them as anti-national is the easiest way to do that.
[Guest]: You know, just now there's a politician who said, oh, maybe we should send the actual
[Guest]: correct information on the CA to the Citizenship Amendment Act to Rahul Gandhi in Italian.
[Guest]: All of this is suggesting that he's illegitimate, he doesn't belong here.
[Guest]: It's trying to negate this person's right or even his claim to be here and saying that
[Guest]: no, you are not a factor at all.
[Guest]: And all of this is about the optics as much as it is about politics.
[Amit Varma]: And interestingly, you'd imagine that, you know, one reads about Martanda Varma's brutality
[Amit Varma]: and all of that, and you see all the violence raging and you think, oh, okay, it's a typical
[Amit Varma]: patriarchal society, there must be toxic masculinity all over.
[Amit Varma]: And yet, and yet, tell me a little bit about sort of the matrilineal nature of Kerala society
[Amit Varma]: and how it sort of came to be and what form it took through these centuries.
[Guest]: So the thing is, people often say matriarchal, it's not matriarchal, it's linear, matrilineal.
[Guest]: Because at the end of the day, it's the men who actually hold a lot of power as well.
[Guest]: It's not like the men are completely divested of influence.
[Guest]: The only changes, to put it simplistically, the family is not man, wife and children.
[Guest]: It is woman, her brother and her children.
[Guest]: So the focus is the woman.
[Guest]: The owner is the woman.
[Guest]: So in the Zamorin of Calicut's family, the eldest female, even if she's a 12 year old
[Guest]: girl, and the Zamorin himself is 70, and he's her grandfather, she's a granduncle of hers,
[Guest]: he will still bow to her and call her Amma, which is mother, because a woman is the technical
[Guest]: owner of the property.
[Guest]: She is the head of the family.
[Guest]: In Travancore similarly, the Raja's wife is only called Ammachi, Ammachi means mother
[Guest]: of his highness's children.
[Guest]: She is not queen, neither are his children royalty.
[Guest]: They are normal, ordinary people.
[Guest]: So for instance, one of the Maharajas of Travancore, let's say this one who died in 1924, his full
[Guest]: title is His Highness Shri Padmanabha Dasa, Vanchipala, Shri Moolam Dhirnar, Damavarma
[Guest]: Kulshekhara, Kiritapati, Manya Sultan, Maharaja Raja Ramaraja Bahadur, Shamsherjung.
[Guest]: And then of course there are his English titles.
[Guest]: But his son is simply Mr. Velayudhan Thambi.
[Amit Varma]: And you can add a Shri, which is given to them.
[Amit Varma]: Perhaps to his great relief.
[Amit Varma]: That's all he is.
[Guest]: Thambi, which is a surname, means brother.
[Guest]: So you're saying this person is like a brother to the royal family, but he is not a Thamburan,
[Guest]: which means he's not a royal himself.
[Guest]: He's a relative of the royal family.
[Guest]: So the king's son is a mister.
[Guest]: The king has a string of titles.
[Guest]: The king's son is always a mister and the king's wife is also a missus.
[Guest]: So a Maharaja of Cochin, for example, had this very powerful wife.
[Guest]: He died in 1932.
[Guest]: The wife was never Maharani.
[Guest]: She was always called, his name was Ramavarma.
[Guest]: She was called Lady Ramavarma.
[Guest]: She was never called Rani Parukutti Netiara, whatever her name was.
[Guest]: She's called Lady Ramavarma.
[Guest]: In his English title as Sir Ramavarma, his wife could be Lady Ramavarma.
[Guest]: But in his family title of Raja, the Raniship went to his sister as per the matrilineal
[Guest]: system.
[Amit Varma]: And the sister's kids are the heirs.
[Guest]: Heirs again, I mean, people often simplistically say it's the man's nephew who succeeds him.
[Guest]: There is no such rule that says the nephew has to succeed him.
[Guest]: The next oldest person in the matrilineal joint family is the ruler.
[Guest]: That may be your brother, a nephew who's older than a brother, that nephew would rule first,
[Guest]: even though he's technically a nephew in terms of relationship.
[Guest]: If the nephew is somehow older, the nephew has the first claim to the throne, only then
[Guest]: the other uncle who's younger.
[Guest]: So age is the determining factor for both the male as well as the female.
[Amit Varma]: This is possibly the origin of fudging birth certificates.
[Amit Varma]: It did not happen in UP, Bihar sports teams.
[Amit Varma]: Ah, you had to do it.
[Guest]: So let's put it in the context of the Travancore royal family.
[Guest]: The favorite analogy I give is through some of these court rituals.
[Guest]: So the Maharani of Travancore, Setu Lakshmibai for example, she is the Maharani, her husband
[Guest]: is only called the consort.
[Guest]: He's not even usually called husband.
[Guest]: He's just called the consort.
[Guest]: The consort cannot sit in the presence of his wife unless she gives him permission.
[Guest]: He can't call his wife by name.
[Guest]: Till this husband of hers died in 1976, he always referred to his wife as her highness.
[Guest]: He would ask his grandchildren, where is her highness?
[Guest]: He'd never say, where's your grandmother?
[Guest]: He'd say, where is her highness, because he was always aware that her position was superior
[Guest]: to him.
[Guest]: When they, you know, she was considered a great reformer because in the 1910s, she started
[Guest]: traveling in the same car with her husband.
[Guest]: Her uncle was scandalized.
[Guest]: He said, he may be your husband, but he's your subject.
[Guest]: He cannot be seen seated next to you because to sit next to somebody signifies equality.
[Guest]: The queen's husband has no right to sit next to her.
[Guest]: He has to follow in a smaller car.
[Guest]: Back in the day, you know, they were not allowed to live in the same palace.
[Guest]: The queen's husbands lived in these smaller bungalows really attached to the palace and
[Guest]: they were summoned to the royal bedchamber whenever the queens wished and that was the
[Guest]: arrangement.
[Guest]: Usually after marriage, etc., even when they had, you know, let's use the polite word of
[Guest]: sexual Congress, even when they had to sleep with each other because astrologers who decided
[Guest]: when Shani was in the right place and Venus was in the right place and things like that.
[Amit Varma]: The consummation of the wedding, basically.
[Guest]: Yeah, the consummation of the wedding and, you know, for the initial phase so that you
[Guest]: make sure a good heir is born.
[Guest]: These husbands were not allowed to die in the palace.
[Guest]: You know, only members of the royal family can die in the palace.
[Guest]: Husbands are not members of the royal family.
[Guest]: So usually if they're dying, they could even be lifted with their deathbed and taken to
[Guest]: die elsewhere in a public building or a private building of their own, not in the palace.
[Guest]: And the wife and the children, the Maharani and her children will not attend the man's
[Guest]: funeral.
[Guest]: He may be your father.
[Guest]: He may be your husband, but he's a subject of the state and royalty does not attend the
[Guest]: funerals of private citizens of the state.
[Guest]: That is how the system works.
[Guest]: For Maharaja's wives also, the amichis, they are technically private citizens of the state.
[Guest]: They are wives of the Maharaja and many Maharajas are deeply in love with their wives.
[Guest]: There's one who died in the mid-19th century.
[Guest]: Technically his wife was a nobody.
[Guest]: She has no state recognition.
[Guest]: She has some pensions and honors, etc., but she has no official recognition from the Darbar
[Guest]: as a member of the royal family.
[Guest]: But when she dies, this man starts fasting and doing lots of religious ceremonies, etc.
[Guest]: And three months later, he himself dies because this is all too much for him to take.
[Guest]: You know, there's another Raja whose first wife dies very young in childbirth and this
[Guest]: man for the next 17-18 years, he doesn't marry because he can't somehow give up the memory
[Guest]: of his first wife.
[Guest]: Legally and technically in the official documents, the Maharaja has no wife.
[Guest]: Even the ritual of marriage.
[Guest]: In Kerala among matrilineal communities, all you have to do is hand over a cloth.
[Guest]: You light a lamp, put a red silk and a cloth, a munda, and you hand it over to the lady.
[Guest]: If she accepts, you're married.
[Guest]: If she throws it in your face, you're not married and divorce is very easy.
[Guest]: All you have to do is, frankly, my ex-boss got in trouble for saying this, but it is
[Guest]: often said in Naya families that to tell a husband not to come back, all you have to
[Guest]: do is keep his things outside and, you know, keep his shoes outside or keep his spittoon
[Guest]: outside or his walking stick outside and he gets the clue.
[Guest]: Don't come back to this house.
[Guest]: That is as simple as divorce gets.
[Guest]: So there was this, what was the point I was making though?
[Amit Varma]: We were talking about matrilineal.
[Amit Varma]: I know, even the ritual of wedding.
[Guest]: So when the kings get married, what happens is the lady is invited to the palace and there's
[Guest]: a room where the wedding takes place.
[Guest]: There's a cloth and it's kept in a tray and there's a golden cup that's kept there with
[Guest]: water.
[Guest]: And what happens is the actual handing of the cloth is done by the Chamberlain.
[Guest]: It's not done by the king in person.
[Guest]: The Chamberlain hands over the cloth.
[Guest]: The lady wears all these fine silks and etc.
[Guest]: She takes that golden pot of water and then goes into the king's bedchamber.
[Guest]: So one could argue that technically she's not even married to the king because the king
[Guest]: is like a saintly figure.
[Guest]: There is this one historian of Travancore who talks about how Marthandavarma, because he
[Guest]: creates all this protocol around the royal family and most importantly, he dedicates
[Guest]: the kingdom to God.
[Guest]: He goes to the Padmanabhaswamy temple and says all my conquests are dedicated to God.
[Guest]: It is often cast as this great spiritual act, but it wasn't a spiritual act.
[Guest]: What he was doing was again politics.
[Guest]: I mean, there may have been some spiritual angle to it, but look at this.
[Guest]: He was a conqueror.
[Guest]: He was seen as an invader in other parts of Kerala.
[Guest]: Everywhere he goes, even after he's got the heart power, people treat him with illegitimacy.
[Guest]: They say you don't belong here.
[Guest]: We don't accept you.
[Guest]: So you donate it to God.
[Guest]: You can criticize the king, but tomorrow onwards, once it becomes God's estate, you can't criticize
[Guest]: God.
[Guest]: So that's why by handing it over to the deity in the temple and ruling as the deity's regent
[Guest]: on earth, you're basically precluding a lot of criticism.
[Guest]: Nobody can stand up to you.
[Guest]: It was the anti-national of its own time.
[Guest]: If you stand up to the king, you're actually standing up to God.
[Guest]: You're not a good citizen of the state, etc, etc.
[Guest]: So you know, he reinforces this because of which the king starts being, to quote this
[Guest]: historian, Sanguni Menon of the 19th century, who was a Darbar historian, the king is seen
[Guest]: a lot like the Pope, the semi-religious figure.
[Guest]: So the semi-religious figure is not technically supposed to have marriage and kids and carnal
[Guest]: feelings.
[Guest]: So there is a little bit of that also.
[Guest]: But yeah, this matrilineal system, it spreads even in regular, you know, Naya families like
[Guest]: mine, for example, in the old days, when my father passed away, you know, there is that
[Guest]: question of whether I should even have done the rituals because his sister's children
[Guest]: are the ones who have the first claim.
[Guest]: Nowadays, the children do it themselves.
[Guest]: But even then, somebody from the sister's family will stand with you and they will also
[Guest]: participate in the ritual because that you can't entirely give up that old custom either.
[Guest]: And you know, when people die, you have that period of pollution that you're not supposed
[Guest]: to go to temples for a certain number of days, 10 days or 12 days or something.
[Guest]: Technically, for a man's children, they don't, they're never polluted.
[Guest]: The day of our father passed away, you can go to the temple if you want, because you
[Guest]: don't get that pollution that goes to a sister's family, they are the ones who are polluted,
[Amit Varma]: not you.
[Amit Varma]: No, and one interesting consequence of matrilineal system, and I'm guessing that there is causation
[Amit Varma]: to this and not just correlation, is that the women therefore tend to be extremely empowered
[Amit Varma]: in the sense I was, you know, just a couple of days ago, I was reading a biography of
[Amit Varma]: Mary Shelley, who wrote Frankenstein, because I was sort of talking about that for my other
[Amit Varma]: show, The Book Club and Storytell.
[Amit Varma]: And interesting tidbit I picked up there is that her husband Percy gave her a book to
[Amit Varma]: read, which was by this guy called James Lawrence.
[Amit Varma]: And it was called the Empire of the Nairs.
[Amit Varma]: And she was, yeah, and Mary Shelley, you got to remember, is a daughter of Mary Wollstonecraft.
[Amit Varma]: She's a feminist herself and all that.
[Amit Varma]: But this book was too feminist for her.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, because what the book describes and what the Nairs were and what Kerala society
[Amit Varma]: was, is not just a matrilineal line of descent and, you know, giving kingship and property
[Amit Varma]: and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, women were empowered, they would take multiple husbands, they would, you know,
[Amit Varma]: have multiple sexual partners.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, all of those, what we tend to think of as sanskar or whatever is actually
[Amit Varma]: something that was brought in by the British when they impose the Victorian values.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, as you've pointed out, in the last episode we did, women in Kerala typically
[Amit Varma]: went around bare chested till the British, you know, impose their sense of shame on them.
[Guest]: And it was in fact considered rude to, it was considered indecent, not even rude.
[Guest]: You were considered a, I mean, not to use, pardon my French, but you know, you were considered
[Guest]: a slut if you wore a blouse.
[Guest]: If you're a Hindu woman of high caste, and you wore a blouse, they'd say, my God, why
[Guest]: you dress like a slut?
[Guest]: Because only a woman of no culture, only a public woman would feel the need to sort of
[Guest]: cover herself up like that.
[Guest]: No decent woman would feel the need to cover herself, because what are you, why are you
[Guest]: sexualizing your breasts?
[Amit Varma]: In fact, if I'm not mistaken, there is an anecdote in Ivory Throne also where a queen
[Amit Varma]: has a woman who dares to cover her breast in front of her, has her breast mutilated.
[Guest]: Yeah, there is a story.
[Guest]: Because she's like, hey, we are all, you know, yeah, you can't go and you can't go and dress
[Guest]: like that.
[Guest]: How shameless.
[Guest]: But the polyandry is fascinating.
[Guest]: This idea of women having multiple husbands, as I said, not only divorce, but you could
[Guest]: have multiple husbands.
[Guest]: I have met a woman, she's still alive, there's a town called Mamalikara, there's a village
[Guest]: near that, which is where my ancestors lived.
[Guest]: And in that village, I met a woman in her 90s, who was married to two brothers.
[Guest]: She was co-wife to two brothers.
[Guest]: And this woman is still alive.
[Guest]: I have spoken to her.
[Guest]: I've talked to her.
[Guest]: And of course, it's very awkward to raise this question.
[Guest]: But everybody in that village openly says that madams, you know, they refer to the senior
[Guest]: husband, the junior husband based on the on the age of these two men who are brothers.
[Guest]: And there is no embarrassment about it.
[Guest]: You know, there is a maid says, avrte valya saar and kocha saar, saar is the English word
[Guest]: sir, and kocha and valya means junior and senior.
[Guest]: There is no embarrassment.
[Guest]: There is no sense of surprise, because these things are not all that unfamiliar.
[Guest]: We like to pretend now, we like to pretend that there is something taboo about this.
[Guest]: But the fact is, in rural Kerala, this sort of story is still, it doesn't startle anyone.
[Guest]: There are still families, there are still old people who've lived that life, who've
[Guest]: lived in that polyandrous system.
[Guest]: My great grandmother, there's a wonderful story about how she first started wearing
[Guest]: the blouse.
[Guest]: This is only in the 1940s.
[Guest]: She's already a woman in her 40s at that time, her second daughter gets married, and the
[Guest]: younger women are also wearing blouses and saris, etc.
[Guest]: They've stopped giving, they've given up the older tradition of wearing just the thing
[Guest]: around your waist.
[Guest]: So for the wedding, the boy's mother comes to the house, and she brings with her and
[Guest]: she's come wearing this thing called the rauka.
[Guest]: And my great grandmother is like, my God, you're my age, but you're wearing a blouse
[Guest]: and all that.
[Guest]: And she says, well, don't you know, this is a new fashion, you know, it's 1940s now such
[Guest]: a modern time, we should start wearing these, these, you know, wonderful new things called
[Guest]: blouses.
[Guest]: And my great grandmother wears it and first she's extremely ashamed about coming out in
[Guest]: public wearing it.
[Guest]: So she'll wear it inside the house, show it to her daughters and hide it and fold it away
[Guest]: and put it away.
[Guest]: Thinking, oh my God, if I wear a blouse, what will my husband say?
[Guest]: What will my brother say?
[Guest]: You know, how indecent of me to do that, what will they think about me and so on.
[Guest]: Finally takes her children sometime to persuade her saying that it's okay to wear a blouse.
[Guest]: Wearing a blouse does not make you a bad person.
[Guest]: You know, this is a time where she belongs to that generation of wearing a blouse is
[Guest]: a bad thing.
[Guest]: My father's side great grandmother till she died in the 1970s.
[Guest]: She never wore a blouse.
[Guest]: She refused.
[Guest]: She said, I will not dress like this.
[Guest]: This new newfangled fashion that you guys have discovered, I'm not going to wear it.
[Guest]: So we have a photograph of her taken on one of those old cameras where you get these square
[Guest]: little pictures of her with a niece of hers or something.
[Guest]: The niece is wearing a blouse and a regular Majali saree as it were.
[Guest]: The old lady's just got a loose cloth on one side of her shoulder.
[Guest]: So the other side is completely exposed and she's got this.
[Guest]: And my father says that it was, I mean, people didn't even look at it as bad or as something
[Guest]: to be embarrassed about.
[Guest]: That woman would, you know, people would come to the house, she would feed them.
[Guest]: She would have servants around the house.
[Guest]: This is an agrarian society.
[Guest]: So a lot of workers would be around and she'd be the one managing all this in the stopless
[Guest]: avatar because nobody looked at it with that sexual gaze.
[Guest]: Nobody looked at it with a gaze of that conveyed vulgarity or indecency in any way.
[Guest]: But these things can change very quickly, right?
[Guest]: That's the thing with sanskar.
[Guest]: Often things we think are ancient sanskar are not all that ancient.
[Guest]: They're a very recent vintage.
[Amit Varma]: No, in fact, and that's probably the worst thing the British gave us this whole veneer
[Amit Varma]: of morality, which you put on everything and I think of, you know, we might be the most
[Amit Varma]: if not one of the most sexually repressed nations on earth and a lot of it is, you know,
[Guest]: because of shit like this, which the British brought in.
[Guest]: We weren't like this.
[Guest]: We internalized a lot of their, you know, the British started calling us uncivilized.
[Guest]: They started calling us barbaric.
[Guest]: They said, Oh, you don't even cover yourself.
[Guest]: And what is this like hideous culture?
[Guest]: And how can you be so proud of your culture if this is how you even walk around?
[Guest]: You know, there's this, I was reading a review yesterday of a book on the Devdasi Balasaraswati.
[Guest]: And it's fascinating that in the review, it's not in the book, I think, but in the review,
[Guest]: the critic talks about how there was a famous Devdasi who would perform and these men would
[Guest]: gather around and one of her acts was to pretend she had lost her hearing and look for it basically
[Guest]: in the crotches of all these men who would gather and they'd all laugh, etc, etc.
[Guest]: It was sort of vulgar in some ways, perhaps it was some sort of playful, sexual, whatever.
[Guest]: But we were a culture that even had that.
[Guest]: And these patrons of Devdasi were all who big temple Brahmins, big landlords, people
[Guest]: like that.
[Guest]: And they were basically saying that Indian culture included landlords gathering around
[Guest]: a woman looking for her hearing in their crotch.
[Guest]: That was permissible.
[Guest]: That's there were spaces to allow even something like that.
[Guest]: Now, we're not getting into the politics of whether it was good for the Devdasi, whether
[Guest]: you know, it was good for women and so on.
[Guest]: But the point is, there were cultural spaces where there's that kind of sexual liberation.
[Amit Varma]: And at least to my limited knowledge, Devdasi weren't slut shamed.
[Guest]: It wasn't, you know, it was a later equation of Devdasi.
[Amit Varma]: Slut shaming also is because of Victorian.
[Guest]: Victorians not only depose Rajas, which means what the patronage that Devdasi has received
[Guest]: is gone suddenly from doing poetry and literature, etc.
[Guest]: Many of them are forced to actually get into prostitution, because they have to survive.
[Guest]: There is obviously prostitution.
[Guest]: One can't say that they weren't coerced and their bodies weren't used by men.
[Guest]: But equally, it wasn't like they were without agency.
[Guest]: A lot of these women did have agency, a lot of the women were beyond, a random man couldn't
[Guest]: go and grasp them.
[Guest]: They chose their patrons if they were in positions of power.
[Guest]: And there are cases of Devdasi in positions of great power and great literature, in places
[Guest]: of great literary quality and great literary achievement.
[Guest]: We discussed Muddu Parini, for example, in our last session on my third book.
[Guest]: So, you know, there are there are stories like that.
[Guest]: But the point is, for a culture now where men go into clubs and beat up women for wearing
[Guest]: short clothes.
[Guest]: Hello, talk about this Devdasi who's looking for a earring in somebody's crotch.
[Guest]: She was, you know, part of India's tradition, as it were.
[Guest]: Tradition is not a rock, as I, you know, that's my latest analogy.
[Guest]: It's not a rock you put in a gilded cage and try to protect.
[Guest]: It's a breathing organism.
[Guest]: It has it has an amorphous shape, you know, it is a shapeless commodity, frankly, just
[Guest]: keeps evolving and changing with time, acquiring different hues based on what we make of it.
[Guest]: So to think that, you know, our culture is some kind of stayed sedate thing where everyone's
[Guest]: got their spines erect and they're wearing starched clothes and chanting the thousand
[Guest]: names of Vishnu every day.
[Guest]: Not true.
[Guest]: There is there is a culture far beyond this textbook version, which the Victorians and
[Guest]: the 19th century so-called reformers popularized and Kerala fell victim to this in a very major
[Guest]: way because the matrilineal system completely shocked all these people, polyandry shocked
[Guest]: them even more.
[Guest]: And perhaps the idea of women holding property got even more scandalizing for a lot of men.
[Amit Varma]: And in your book, of course, is all this and more.
[Amit Varma]: And the interesting thing about your book is that it's more than 700 pages.
[Amit Varma]: It's 20 chapters and a preface.
[Amit Varma]: And we've just finished talking about the preface.
[Amit Varma]: Let's take a quick commercial break and we'll come back and we'll actually talk about the
[Amit Varma]: book.
[Amit Varma]: If you've gotten so far in this podcast, it means you like listening to good audio content
[Amit Varma]: and you're thirsty for knowledge.
[Amit Varma]: In that case, I'd urge you to check out Storytel, the sponsors of this episode.
[Amit Varma]: Storytel is an audio book platform that has a massive range of audio books from around
[Amit Varma]: the world.
[Amit Varma]: The international collection is stellar, but so is their local collection.
[Amit Varma]: They have a fantastic range of Marathi and Hindi audio books.
[Amit Varma]: What's more, I do a weekly podcast there called The Book Club with Amit Verma, in which I
[Amit Varma]: talk about one book every week, giving context, giving you a taste of the book and so on.
[Amit Varma]: As long as Storytel sponsors the show, I will recommend an audio book that I liked on that
[Amit Varma]: platform every week.
[Amit Varma]: My recommendation for this week is the subject of this episode of The Scene in The Unseen,
[Amit Varma]: The Ivory Throne by Manu Pillay.
[Amit Varma]: Yes, it's available as an audio book on Storytel.
[Amit Varma]: So if you're enjoying this episode, you'll probably enjoy the audio book as well.
[Amit Varma]: The Ivory Throne by Manu Pillay on Storytel, download their app or visit Storytel.com.
[Amit Varma]: Remember, that's Storytel with a single L, Storytel.com.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to The Scene in The Unseen, I'm chatting with Manu Pillay about The Ivory
[Amit Varma]: Throne, his book on Kerala, in particular, the house of Travancore.
[Amit Varma]: And the book begins with a chapter on the most famous Verma of all time, Raja Ravi Verma,
[Amit Varma]: which in many ways is a very apt sort of place to begin because his descendants basically
[Amit Varma]: rule the rest of the book.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a bit about, you know, how Raja Ravi Verma coming up in the court of Ayilyam
[Amit Varma]: Tirunel.
[Guest]: Ayilyam Tirunel.
[Amit Varma]: Ayilyam Tirunel and his wife Kalyani Pillay, who was one of those amachis who sort of a
[Amit Varma]: very powerful consort to the king as such, but after his death, sort of fades away.
[Amit Varma]: But an early patron of Raja Ravi Verma, who initially when he goes to the paint, I mean,
[Amit Varma]: of course, because of his upbringing and everything, he is sort of taken in and patronized.
[Amit Varma]: But people refuse to teach him painting, the established guys of the day.
[Amit Varma]: And so what's happening there?
[Guest]: So Ravi Verma belongs to a group of 10 odd families, which are called Koyildambirans.
[Guest]: Koyildambirans are these ex-Rajas who immigrated from Malabar to Travancore.
[Guest]: Most of them during the time Tipu Sultan invaded Malabar and they lost all their territories.
[Guest]: So they accepted pensions afterwards from the British and they decided to just come
[Guest]: and live in Travancore.
[Guest]: Ravi Verma's family, however, was the oldest, which came in the 17th century.
[Guest]: And they were famous for an entire, for like nearly a hundred years, all the kings of Travancore
[Guest]: were fathered by men who were consorts to Travancore princesses.
[Guest]: These consorts all, the male consorts all came from the Khilmanur family for a very
[Guest]: long time.
[Guest]: So Ravi Verma was born into this family.
[Guest]: Now a lot of legend has sort of cloaked his story after he became famous.
[Guest]: So there is a story, for example, that he was brought to court and he was rejected as
[Guest]: a princess's husband because he was too dark.
[Guest]: And how he said, oh, this was actually a wonderful thing because if he had been forced to marry
[Guest]: a princess, he would never have been able to travel and discover his true calling.
[Guest]: It's rubbish because by the time he came to the Travancore court, all the princesses were
[Guest]: already married.
[Guest]: So there was no question of marrying a royal princess.
[Guest]: It's one of those later stories, masala that people add to the stories of famous men.
[Guest]: Even the story that, you know, he was some sort of self-taught genius in an artless universe
[Guest]: and he had to sort of struggle against the odds is exaggerated in some ways because there
[Guest]: was a lot of art in Travancore.
[Guest]: He was exposed to a lot of things.
[Guest]: For a long time, there was a painter called Ramaswamy Naidu, there was before him a man
[Guest]: called Alagiri Naidu.
[Guest]: These people were men of talent who, you know, far surpassed him for a very long period.
[Guest]: But he did something very unusual, which is that Ravi Verma never got satisfied with court
[Guest]: settings and the patronage of one court.
[Guest]: He was there for 18 years, 1862 till the death of this king called Ayalayam Tirunel in 1880.
[Guest]: The successor king did not like Ravi Verma, so Ravi Verma had no option but to leave.
[Guest]: Then he does something.
[Guest]: He takes advantage of the railways.
[Guest]: He takes advantage of patronage.
[Guest]: He's getting, you know, people are moving around.
[Guest]: In India, it's finally possible to move around with great ease.
[Guest]: So former Diwan of Travancore from a chief minister called Madhav Rao is now Diwan in
[Guest]: Baroda.
[Guest]: He uses that to bounce and get a painting commission in Baroda.
[Guest]: Then he gets another one in Mysore.
[Guest]: That's how Ravi Verma becomes this pan-Indian figure and leaves the Travancore setting.
[Guest]: If he had stayed content as a Darbar artist, he would never have become famous.
[Guest]: It was not purely talent.
[Guest]: Perhaps there were more talented men than him in the Darbar.
[Guest]: He's the one who made an opportunity out of it.
[Guest]: He saw an opportunity, recognized it for what it was and worked like a professional.
[Guest]: He diligently stuck to deadlines as far as he could.
[Guest]: He delivered on promises he made.
[Guest]: He traveled, hustled, you know, even when he became famous, he once went to get a commission
[Guest]: from the Nizam of Hyderabad.
[Guest]: He was by then a very famous artist.
[Guest]: So Nizam made him wait for two hours and then finally just brushed him away.
[Guest]: But Ravi Verma's willingness to hustle is really something because, you know, that professional
[Guest]: ethic is not something that was linked to his background.
[Guest]: He came from a feudal background.
[Guest]: He had no reason to live a professional life like this.
[Guest]: What is interesting with the Travancore royal family and him though is that how his quest
[Guest]: to sort of build a career causes a lot of animosity in his personal life.
[Guest]: Now Ravi Verma's wife is the grandmother of the future Maharanis of Travancore, Setu Lakshmi
[Guest]: and Setu Parvati guy and there her marriage with Ravi Verma is extremely turbulent.
[Guest]: This woman to begin with is from an aristocratic family.
[Guest]: She does not understand why her husband needs a profession.
[Guest]: More scandalizingly, she doesn't know why on earth he wants to be a painter of all things
[Guest]: because painters were seen as artisans.
[Guest]: They were not seen as artists, you know, signing your name is an innovation and that he really
[Guest]: begins in Travancore and brings a certain respect to it, partly also because of his
[Amit Varma]: class.
[Amit Varma]: And the combination of using the lithograph to spread his work and, you know, signing
[Guest]: his name just, you know, as a branding exercise, you know, unprecedented.
[Guest]: But he also uses his class and caste connections.
[Guest]: The thing is, Ravi Verma, because he belongs to these families, it supplies husbands to
[Guest]: royalty.
[Guest]: He is essentially in many ways an aristocrat.
[Guest]: He's part of the cream of society.
[Guest]: So wherever he goes, he's not treated as an artisan.
[Guest]: He's treated as a gentleman artist.
[Guest]: And that's a very new sort of concept for an Indian painter in the late 19th century.
[Guest]: Now, the thing is, the wife doesn't like this.
[Guest]: It also means a lot of separation from her.
[Guest]: There's a charming story, but not charming, really, but a very telling story about how
[Guest]: he once has disappeared for a long time.
[Guest]: Then he finally comes back to his wife's place.
[Guest]: And as usual, as a matrilineal husband, he has to go to his wife's place to meet her.
[Guest]: And she's gone for a bath or something, or she's gone to the temple or something.
[Guest]: And he's got this wonderful Italian chandelier to hang up there.
[Guest]: He tells all the servants to go ahead and put this up before she comes back from the
[Guest]: temple visit.
[Guest]: So it's a surprise for her.
[Guest]: The lady comes back, she takes one look at this well lit, beautiful, expensive chandelier
[Guest]: he's got from some god knows which Maharaja or the other, commands her servants to pull
[Guest]: it down and throws it out of the window.
[Guest]: And she smashes it because she doesn't care.
[Guest]: She's like, you know, you've not been here for two years.
[Guest]: I don't know, you can just waltz in with a chandelier and think that the present is going
[Guest]: to sort this out.
[Guest]: It's not.
[Guest]: She also, there's a record from her nephew talking about how she got addicted to alcohol.
[Guest]: Now, her sisters were already by that time, Maharanis of Travancore.
[Guest]: So she's essentially in their shadow on the one hand.
[Guest]: She's also got a husband who neglects her.
[Guest]: And you know, she's therefore seemed to have a very difficult life.
[Guest]: And she dies a very untimely death in her mid thirties, you know, she dies a very young
[Guest]: woman.
[Guest]: Now, Ravi Verma has three daughters and two sons.
[Guest]: One daughter really doesn't come into the picture.
[Guest]: The oldest son becomes a drunkard, disappears in 1912.
[Guest]: Nobody knows what happened to him.
[Guest]: There's a story that he disappeared into Goa and he married a Konkani Christian and there
[Guest]: are Christian descendants of Ravi Verma in Goa, but nobody's really heard of them after
[Guest]: that.
[Guest]: The second son goes to the JJ School of Art, learns art, etc.
[Guest]: But has only a fraction of his father's talent.
[Guest]: He doesn't become a famous name.
[Guest]: And he never manages to leave the Travancore Darbar in Kerala and get stuck in that court
[Guest]: environment.
[Guest]: So he's not famous.
[Guest]: Of the two daughters, this is where the politics comes.
[Guest]: Now, Manjalis have the word Soundarya Panakam for it, beauty wars, you know, small little
[Guest]: petty disputes in the family.
[Guest]: The older daughter is not only good looking, she's extremely imperious.
[Guest]: And the mother's untimely death means that she becomes the de facto head of the family.
[Guest]: The father's anyway traveling, etc.
[Guest]: So this eldest girl steps up and becomes the main force in the family.
[Guest]: That she's beautiful and imperious further adds to her personality.
[Guest]: The second daughter is not only not beautiful, she's got a squint, she's dark skinned and
[Guest]: she's therefore seen as the not pretty sister in the family.
[Guest]: The youngest one's also good looking.
[Guest]: So the middle sister's got this inferiority complex, you know, of sorts that she's not
[Guest]: not only she's not the main person in the family, her sister's the head of the family.
[Guest]: She's not even good looking.
[Guest]: Now it is these two sisters, their daughters, who get adopted into the Travancore royal
[Guest]: family because the Travancore family has kings and princes, but it's run out of females.
[Guest]: Whenever that happens, they adopt girls.
[Guest]: In North Indian families, they adopt boys from various families.
[Guest]: But in this case, they adopt girl children.
[Amit Varma]: So if they don't have daughters, they'll adopt girls.
[Amit Varma]: And the backstory to this is that earlier the two people, the two girls they adopted
[Amit Varma]: were the sisters of Bhagirathi, who was Raja Ravi Varma's wife.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, they have an interest, especially the older one of them, who is Lakshmibai and
[Amit Varma]: earlier Lakshmibai, not the heroine of our story.
[Amit Varma]: And she has an interest in getting her nieces, so to say, adopted into the grand nieces,
[Guest]: her grandchildren.
[Guest]: Basically, there were three sisters in the Mavelikara aristocratic family of royal descent
[Guest]: from North Kerala.
[Guest]: Two were adopted in the mid 19th century into the Travancore family.
[Guest]: The one who was not adopted is Ravi Varma's wife.
[Guest]: Now a few two generations pass, one of these queens has no children.
[Guest]: The other queen has only sons, no surviving daughters.
[Guest]: So the adoption is proof pointless because you've produced boys and boys will rule, but
[Guest]: boys will not take the family forward.
[Guest]: So you need to adopt girls again.
[Guest]: So who do they turn to?
[Guest]: The grandchildren of their third sister, who wasn't adopted.
[Guest]: Those grandchildren are then brought into the family.
[Guest]: But now the funny thing is this adoption is fraught with complications because in the
[Guest]: Travancore royal family itself, the heir apparent, who then dies very soon after, some say he
[Guest]: was poisoned to death, but there's no proof.
[Guest]: He basically objects to these girls being adopted for several reasons.
[Guest]: He says their grandmother, that is Ravi Varma's wife, was addicted to alcohol.
[Amit Varma]: So this is not a good family.
[Amit Varma]: And her brother, in fact.
[Amit Varma]: And her brother.
[Guest]: There's cancer in the family.
[Guest]: That's why, you know, that's also not a good thing.
[Guest]: He thinks these girls are not suitable to be adopted.
[Guest]: Some say Ravi Varma used his influence on Lord Curzon, the Viceroy.
[Guest]: But the fact is that then Maharaja was keen on these girls, so they get it done.
[Guest]: One interesting thing, which I discovered after I wrote the book, and which really took
[Guest]: me aback, and it's funny how not a single biographer, even the most authoritative biography
[Guest]: of Ravi Varma by Rupika Chawla does not have this story, and it's not made it to my book
[Guest]: because I found it afterwards, is that there's one more scandal in Ravi Varma's family, which
[Guest]: was that his father-in-law was a murderer.
[Guest]: So Ravi Varma's mother-in-law, there's this magnificent painting he's done of this lady.
[Guest]: You know, he's, this lady is, you know, he's famous for painting all these fair-skinned
[Guest]: Indian classical beauties, as it were.
[Guest]: This lady is not only fair-skinned, she's dark-skinned.
[Guest]: She has bloodshot eyes, a mane of really like white silver hair, glaring out of the painting.
[Guest]: He's got a bulbous nose, not a classical Ravi Varma beauty you'd expect.
[Guest]: But he's, this one painting, I think, is the most striking portrait he's done because he's
[Guest]: depicted his mother-in-law exactly as she was.
[Guest]: Some say he's actually softened her appearance because she's a ferocious looking woman in
[Guest]: this painting.
[Guest]: It was in the Travancore royal family, now I think in a private collection in Bangalore.
[Guest]: And this lady apparently was having, there's a story that she had a servant called Madhavan,
[Guest]: and one day Madhavan was found killed.
[Guest]: The official story was he'd stolen 12 pieces of jewelry, so her husband caught him and
[Guest]: beat him up and murdered him.
[Guest]: Now the official who actually investigated it found that the murder was highly sadistic.
[Guest]: Someone had tried to gouge out his eyes, a massive jackfruit had been like used to beat
[Guest]: him up and this, and then they tried to hang up the body or put it in a, in a, in a pond.
[Guest]: It's not clear what exactly happened, but they tried to make it look like suicide.
[Guest]: And this particular official said the police is not doing a good job of the investigation.
[Guest]: They're trying to cover this up as a suicide.
[Guest]: Why are they doing this?
[Guest]: This is all in 1862.
[Guest]: This is a covered up suicide in Mavelikara.
[Guest]: And the senior official says, no, this has to be investigated properly.
[Guest]: And they discover in the Cochin Courier, there's a newspaper that says that Ravi Arma's father-in-law
[Guest]: suspected this lady, this ferocious lady in the painting, of having an affair with this
[Guest]: servant called Madhavan.
[Guest]: And that is why he killed him in this sadistic fashion.
[Guest]: And the man was tried.
[Guest]: He was taken to court and he was sentenced to life imprisonment.
[Guest]: And this is not mentioned in any of Ravi Arma's biographies that his father-in-law was essentially
[Guest]: stuck in jail and that his mother-in-law was part of one of the big sex scandals of the
[Guest]: of the 1860s as it were.
[Guest]: So anyway, so there's all sorts of chaos and problems in Ravi Arma's family.
[Guest]: Yet in 1900, these two girls are adopted.
[Amit Varma]: Which are basically the elder daughter of Ravi Arma, you mentioned is Maha Prabha and
[Amit Varma]: she's a fair and beautiful one.
[Amit Varma]: And her daughter is Setu Lakshmibai.
[Amit Varma]: And the other one, yeah, and the middle daughter, I can't pronounce her name, Kuchukuni.
[Guest]: So her daughter is Setu Parvati Bai, who were adopted as senior and junior Rani of Travel
[Guest]: Corps.
[Guest]: Senior and junior Rani.
[Guest]: Now, this brings in, now, there was already politics between the sisters, you know, their
[Guest]: mothers did not get along.
[Guest]: Their mothers were, had their own issues.
[Guest]: Now, this translates to the children as well.
[Guest]: Because what happens is Setu Lakshmibai, the older one is the fair-skinned, perfect child.
[Guest]: She's very good at her exam.
[Guest]: She's very diligent, very obedient.
[Guest]: Teachers all love her.
[Guest]: And as senior Rani, she's very proper.
[Guest]: She's just like perfect senior Rani, does everything perfectly.
[Guest]: But she doesn't enjoy the limelight.
[Guest]: So she's a very shy woman.
[Guest]: So people find it sweet.
[Guest]: You know, she's in a position of influence, but she's also shy.
[Guest]: So like this, this evolving idea of ideal of Indian womanhood, which is that women should
[Guest]: be a certain way.
[Guest]: She seems to fit all these new notions of what a girl should be.
[Amit Varma]: And what you also, you know, describe in your book is how shortly after these two are adapted,
[Amit Varma]: there are three deaths in the family, which is both the sons die.
[Amit Varma]: And then the senior Lakshmibai dies as well.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, Setu Lakshmibai at the age of 10, at the age of 5, is a de facto queen
[Guest]: of Trivandrum.
[Guest]: So now this causes issues for her cousin, because her cousin is the junior Rani.
[Guest]: Now implicit in that title itself is junior, your junior, she's just a year younger.
[Guest]: And frankly, she has more of a personality to be queen.
[Guest]: She's rebellious, unorthodox, you know, she's the first person in the Trivandrum royal family
[Guest]: to take her daughter and go abroad for the first time, cross the Kala Pani on her own.
[Guest]: She goes to meet the Pope and the Pope's secretary says, oh, you know, with the Pope, you can't
[Guest]: really wear makeup, etc.
[Guest]: You have to be dressed a certain way.
[Guest]: And she tells him to essentially buzz off and say that she'll dress exactly as she wants
[Guest]: in front of the Pope.
[Guest]: In the 1930s, Trivandrum is an orthodox temple town.
[Guest]: And this lady has the gall really to bring Margaret Sanger, the great birth control activist
[Guest]: who even cheesed off Gandhiji, to come to this temple town and address a gathering full
[Guest]: of men and about the advantages of birth control.
[Guest]: She's a very spunky, interesting lady, her politics is extremely complicated, but as
[Guest]: a person, remarkable figure.
[Guest]: So you have a senior Rani who officially holds the limelight, who's very shy and retiring
[Guest]: and is very sweet, but does not have, you know, this kind of rebellious personality.
[Guest]: You have the junior who hates being in the shadow, who hates being not in the limelight,
[Guest]: who wants the limelight and who has the personality for it, but she's stuck in a junior position.
[Guest]: And although they're only five years old at the time, six and just about five, one year's
[Guest]: age difference.
[Guest]: Although they're children, they're seen by the people as institutions.
[Guest]: They're not little girls, they're senior Rani and junior Rani.
[Guest]: So from the beginning, there is protocol around them.
[Guest]: From the beginning, you know, they have to visit and meet state visitors and governors
[Amit Varma]: and viceroys and people.
[Amit Varma]: And childhood is gone.
[Amit Varma]: They can't stay with friends.
[Guest]: There is no, they have no friends.
[Guest]: There is no notion of childhood.
[Guest]: They're not even allowed to see their families except, you know, every six months their families
[Guest]: can come and stay.
[Guest]: But otherwise, they can't really have any access.
[Amit Varma]: Even their fathers have to, you know, their fathers have to bow to them.
[Guest]: You know, they can't, you know, you can't call your daughter by name.
[Guest]: She is now her highness to you.
[Guest]: You can't really touch her head and pretend she's your daughter.
[Guest]: I mean, private, perhaps you can, but basically a lot of protocol comes into their life.
[Guest]: Now they grew up, they get their tutors and governesses, and they're raised in a certain
[Guest]: way.
[Guest]: Now marriage comes into this.
[Guest]: Now, already one is evolving into this good looking pretty one.
[Guest]: The other one is not, you know, like her mother.
[Guest]: She's darker.
[Guest]: In fact, she's dark.
[Guest]: During the adoption, a senior courtier even said she's too black to be a princess.
[Guest]: There's an actual record of this, that this girl should not be adopted because she's too
[Guest]: dark and she doesn't look royal enough.
[Guest]: So you can imagine she's obviously affected by this constant comparison with her seemingly
[Guest]: perfect older sister.
[Guest]: Now marriage happens.
[Guest]: How does marriage happen?
[Guest]: Boys are presented to these girls.
[Guest]: So the senior Rani is presented two brothers and she's made to look from a balcony and
[Guest]: choose whichever one she likes of the two brothers.
[Guest]: One would think that in courts, horoscopes, etc. matter.
[Guest]: No.
[Guest]: The Rani chooses who she wants.
[Guest]: It's the job of the astrologer to make the horoscope match.
[Guest]: Otherwise he loses his job.
[Guest]: That's how it works.
[Guest]: So she looks at these two boys.
[Guest]: The older one is this 20 year old, very handsome man.
[Guest]: She says she's a 10 year old girl.
[Guest]: She's like, no, no, no.
[Guest]: This one is too much for me.
[Guest]: She chooses this diminutive looking 16 year old, you know, slightly salki looking, less
[Guest]: handsome brother.
[Amit Varma]: Which surprises everyone because basically the older boy, as you describe him, and he's
[Amit Varma]: even depicted in a Raja Ravi Verma painting, which I then googled to see what it's like,
[Amit Varma]: is basically a bare chested Virat Kohli.
[Guest]: He is.
[Guest]: In fact, there's one painting that's not in the book of him.
[Guest]: He's sort of, you know, he held his hands like this, he's folded against his chest.
[Guest]: And he's again shirtless and he's got his hair let loose a little bit.
[Guest]: And he's wearing a typical sort of munda around his waist and he's shirtless and he's looking
[Guest]: out like that at the viewer of the painting and it's painted by Ravi Verma and he's strikingly
[Guest]: good.
[Guest]: I mean, that's a wonderful painting.
[Guest]: Like he's, it's odd that in the early 20th century, this man clearly worked out a lot
[Guest]: because he's got the muscles and all of that.
[Guest]: Yeah, because this is a time when you know, status was in the size of your potbelly.
[Amit Varma]: I'm like, this is your local Bollywood wannabe in the Lokhandwala gym.
[Guest]: So there's the painting you refer to is the Ravi Verma painting called Shri Rama vanquishes
[Unknown]: the sea in which this one models as Rama for Ravi Verma.
[Guest]: So he is not chosen, his brother is chosen.
[Guest]: His brother later gets smallpox and his face is completely left with pockmarks and he's
[Guest]: not a very handsome man, but he's a very shrewd man.
[Guest]: And the brother's name is Rama Verma.
[Guest]: He's called the Valya Koil Tambaram, the senior consort, because he's married to the senior
[Guest]: Rani.
[Guest]: Now junior Rani the next year has offered husband choices for herself.
[Guest]: She's offered five men.
[Guest]: She decides to go and marry a good looking man who's also unfortunately the oldest, he's
[Guest]: about 11 years older than her.
[Guest]: But she says, look, he's already got a BA degree, he's a graduate from a university
[Guest]: and all that.
[Guest]: So he must be a good pick.
[Guest]: And she marries him, which is a chap called Ravi Verma, which is also called Ravi Verma.
[Guest]: He's the Kochi Koil Tambaram, the junior consort.
[Guest]: Now the thing is, the marriages turn out very interestingly for both women.
[Guest]: The senior Rani is married to this man and she is devoted to her husband.
[Guest]: He has the personality to go out, he picks up now that he's picked up from a rural part
[Guest]: of Kerala and planted in the palace, he starts learning English and he starts reading a lot.
[Guest]: He starts riding, he acquires skills at shooting and sports and things like that.
[Guest]: He enjoys this royal life.
[Guest]: And she's devoted to him.
[Guest]: And she finds that he's really good at the limelight and all of that.
[Guest]: So she starts increasingly supporting her husband.
[Guest]: Junior Rani's husband, although they get married at 10, the marriage is only consummated at
[Guest]: 14.
[Guest]: Not immediately, they're children.
[Guest]: So in the beginning, they're allowed to play hopscotch with each other and play board games
[Guest]: and things like that for one hour every day.
[Guest]: Nothing more than that.
[Guest]: There's no contact beyond that.
[Guest]: Junior Rani's husband, unfortunately, is not, he's already a grown man when they marry.
[Guest]: So by the time she's 14 and ready to consummate the marriage, he's in his mid 20s.
[Guest]: He's got a graduate degree, but he's extremely orthodox.
[Guest]: So just as she's unorthodox and rebellious, and she'll even play golf when she's pregnant
[Guest]: and go out riding and learn to drive and things like that.
[Guest]: This man won't shake hands with women thinking it's you know, I'm impure.
[Guest]: At banquets, he'll sit there clutching a lemon because eating meat and eating in the presence
[Guest]: of white people will make him lose his cast.
[Amit Varma]: I actually highlighted that line in the book because it's such a fantastic detail that
[Amit Varma]: at banquets, he's sitting holding a lemon because lemons absorbed impurities from.
[Amit Varma]: Oh, that's the reason you're holding a lemon.
[Amit Varma]: It's the same principle.
[Guest]: You hang a lemon outside the door because it absorbs all the evil in the room.
[Guest]: So naturally, the Junior Rani's guests were not pleased when she was there.
[Guest]: And she's hosting a party and her husband sits there pretending they're all unwelcome,
[Guest]: impure guests.
[Guest]: And she was a shrewd, a very, very clever woman, for example, she was a vegetarian.
[Guest]: So there are these wonderful stories about how, you know, garden parties that have fish
[Guest]: fry going around with toothpicks, etc, for people to eat them.
[Guest]: Now she couldn't offend her guests, but she was a vegetarian, so she couldn't eat the
[Guest]: fish.
[Guest]: So she would have tapioca or cassava cut in the exact shape and fried in the exact same
[Guest]: fashion.
[Guest]: And that would come to her on a tray.
[Guest]: So she could eat something that looked like fish, but it was actually vegetarian, while
[Guest]: her guests ate the actual fish while her husband sat there clutching a lemon.
[Guest]: So it's as complicated as that.
[Guest]: So Junior Rani's marriage is not very happy.
[Guest]: Now the coming of the husbands add new complications to this because in the matrilineal system,
[Guest]: the sisters are supposed to be tight.
[Guest]: Now, to begin with, their mothers have a politics, so the sisters, these adopted Rani's don't
[Guest]: get along.
[Guest]: Senior and Junior Rani don't get along.
[Guest]: The husbands come in, which means a new element comes in succession, who produces the next
[Guest]: heir to the throne.
[Guest]: They've been adopted to produce the next Maharaja, you know.
[Amit Varma]: And the thing to notice, because all these people died, you know, you basically got a
[Amit Varma]: king who's passing 50, all his predecessor kings have died before 50.
[Amit Varma]: So he is like, I need an heir now, these kids have to produce heirs right away.
[Amit Varma]: And the first son born out of either of these two girls is the next ruler, is the next ruler.
[Amit Varma]: So now there is competition among them.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, Sethu Lakshmibai has a head start of a year.
[Amit Varma]: She gets married at 10, the other kid gets married, you know, around the same time, and
[Guest]: then they turn 14 and the marriages are consummated.
[Guest]: So Sethu Lakshmibai incidentally does get pregnant.
[Guest]: But in the eighth month, the baby I think dies in the womb or something.
[Guest]: And essentially, it's a stillbirth.
[Guest]: It is alleged that there is black magic involved.
[Guest]: There are stories, but no evidence of that.
[Guest]: But it's a court, royal courts are full of rumors and factions and things like that.
[Guest]: And once succession comes in, again, the mothers get involved.
[Guest]: Because see, the junior Rani's mother has always been in the shadow of her sister and
[Guest]: her daughter, the junior Rani is also junior.
[Guest]: So now what happens is in 1912, at the age of 16, the junior Rani produces a male heir.
[Guest]: Suddenly, this becomes in many ways her passport to prominence.
[Guest]: From being in the shadow of her sister, the senior Rani, she is now mother to the heir
[Guest]: apparent.
[Guest]: So the heir apparent is entitled to his own palace, to his own servants, to his own income,
[Guest]: etc.
[Guest]: Even though the boy is just a baby, she says, as his mother, I should be able to manage
[Guest]: that.
[Guest]: And the Maharaja says that makes sense.
[Guest]: He is, even though he's an infant, he's automatically heir apparent to the throne.
[Guest]: So everything an heir apparent is entitled to, the junior Rani gets.
[Guest]: So she moves out of the senior Rani's shadow.
[Guest]: The senior Rani, meanwhile, feels that, you know, she's now suddenly lost all her prominence.
[Guest]: Because not only did she have this stillbirth after that, she had several miscarriages.
[Guest]: And then for the next nearly a decade, she doesn't have children.
[Guest]: She's struggling to have children.
[Guest]: And eventually she has girls.
[Guest]: Whereas her sister produces the Maharaja, next Maharaja, she produces a girl to continue
[Guest]: the matrilineal line and she produces a spear to the throne in the form of a second son.
[Guest]: So she's performed her duty to the dynasty within a space of one decade.
[Guest]: She's gone ahead and produced three children.
[Guest]: Senior Rani has no children.
[Guest]: She only has two daughters much later, after all the junior Rani's children are born.
[Guest]: So this to begin with, things are getting a little lopsided in terms of who's the main
[Guest]: figure in the family.
[Amit Varma]: Then we come to the year 1920.
[Amit Varma]: And what was also interesting are the details in your book about how after this first son
[Amit Varma]: is born, she is so paranoid that he's going to be sabotaged and he's going to be killed
[Amit Varma]: as allegedly earlier kings might have been, that she doesn't allow anyone to meet the
[Amit Varma]: kid.
[Amit Varma]: Have free access to the boy.
[Amit Varma]: Including the senior Rani Lakshmibai's husband, the renowned scholar Kerala Varma, who is
[Guest]: like a father figure to both these young girls.
[Amit Varma]: Father of modern Malayalam prose literature.
[Amit Varma]: And I want to come back to Sanskrit and Malayalam in a bit.
[Amit Varma]: But he's so he's basically like a father figure to both these young girls.
[Amit Varma]: And suddenly one of them gets a son and he's not allowed to be alone with the child.
[Guest]: And ditto, of course, the aunt is like no any other kid is allowed because I mean, there
[Guest]: are no rules.
[Guest]: It's just that it's very clear that you are not welcome around this child because people
[Guest]: are paranoid.
[Guest]: Frankly, that he's not a boy again, that kid from day one is a future Maharaja.
[Guest]: He is seen, therefore, as that icon.
[Guest]: He's not seen, therefore, as a little boy, he's not a normal baby.
[Amit Varma]: And he also he is also the relief for the baggage that these two women, junior Rani
[Guest]: and her mother have carried for years and years and years.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: That's the thing.
[Guest]: A politics that starts with Ravi Varma's bad marriage.
[Guest]: So husband and wife don't get along, their daughters that produces politics between their
[Guest]: daughters in terms of the beautiful daughter who Ravi Varma paints and uses as a model
[Guest]: and who's given, who's a de facto head of the family and the not so beautiful daughter
[Amit Varma]: who's always in the shadows.
[Amit Varma]: Who the mother liked apparently.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: Then you have royal children who are now adopted into a royal family where power gets involved.
[Guest]: So in addition to family dispute and the usual family quarrels that all families have powers
[Guest]: involved now.
[Guest]: So things start going.
[Guest]: I mean, the standard of the scale of the problem starts increasing, magnifying.
[Guest]: Now what happens is that Setulakshmi becomes cornered at court, partly also because she's
[Guest]: extremely devoted to her husband and her uncle, the Maharaja, the old man, Mulam Dharam, does
[Guest]: not like it.
[Guest]: And he says, you know, this boy is just your consort, you should keep him in his place.
[Guest]: And the consort, her husband, is also getting big airs about who he is in the sense that,
[Guest]: you know, junior Rani is the junior Rani.
[Guest]: She's junior to the senior Rani.
[Guest]: But for the husband, she's still a queen.
[Guest]: So he has to bow to the junior Rani also, because she is still royalty and he's not.
[Guest]: He hates that.
[Guest]: He feels that as husband to the senior Rani, why should he bow to the junior Rani?
[Guest]: Whereas junior Rani says, whether or not I'm junior in my family is not your business.
[Guest]: As far as you're concerned, I am also a Rani.
[Guest]: So you have to bow to me.
[Guest]: So the feud begins between these two people and the senior Rani supports her husband saying,
[Guest]: you know, how dare you speak to my husband like this.
[Guest]: She's being cornered because she can't produce children.
[Guest]: All she has for support is her husband.
[Guest]: So she becomes increasingly close to her husband.
[Guest]: And junior Rani says, this is not your loyalty should be to the matrilineal family, not to
[Guest]: your husband.
[Guest]: This is also linked to that larger Victorian conversation that wives should be devoted
[Guest]: to their husbands, matrilineal system is bad, patriarchal families are better.
[Guest]: So this whole conversation is also part of that larger change in society.
[Guest]: What is also interesting is the Maharaja at that time is this man called Moolam Tirtha,
[Guest]: the uncle of these adopted Rani's.
[Guest]: He is entirely a puppet in the hands of some courtiers.
[Guest]: That is another fascinating story that tells you a lot about marriage and matrilineal in
[Guest]: Kerala.
[Guest]: So the Maharaja is married first to a lady.
[Guest]: She dies, leaving him a son.
[Guest]: He doesn't marry again for about 16-17 years.
[Guest]: At some point, he falls in love with a lady called Kartiayani.
[Guest]: Now Kartiayani is the wife of a palace servant and she belongs to a family who traditionally
[Guest]: supplied women who husk the rice, etc. in the Padmanabhaswamy temple.
[Guest]: So middle class Naya family, not aristocracy, not of especially high birth or anything.
[Guest]: And she is married to a palace servant called Shangubalai.
[Guest]: Now what happens is Maharaja falls in love with this married woman.
[Guest]: Shangubalai agrees to give up his wife.
[Guest]: Divorce is easy.
[Guest]: So he divorces Kartiayani.
[Guest]: Maharaja decides to marry Kartiayani.
[Guest]: But there's a rule.
[Guest]: Maharajas can only marry from specific, you know, families called Amma Vidus in Trivandrum,
[Guest]: which are, you know, the families from which they take their brides usually.
[Guest]: So what does he do?
[Guest]: He adopts Kartiayani into one of these Amma Vidus, raises her status in society.
[Guest]: She suddenly becomes an aristocratic woman through adoption and the Maharaja marries
[Guest]: her.
[Guest]: In return for, so now Maharaja is married to an already married woman.
[Guest]: In return for giving her up, the ex-husband is also given the title of Tambi and raised
[Guest]: into a very senior position in court.
[Guest]: And he becomes the real controller of the Maharaja.
[Guest]: Increasingly the Maharaja's access to the Maharaja, you know, a lot of decisions he
[Guest]: takes are actually channeled through this man called Shankaran, Shangubalai becomes
[Guest]: Shankaran Tambi.
[Guest]: Through his second wife's first husband.
[Guest]: So once in court, there was a, there was a journalist who was asked in court who is Shankaran
[Guest]: Tambi.
[Guest]: Shankaran Tambi was the former husband of the Maharaja's present wife, because that
[Guest]: was the fact of it.
[Guest]: I mean, it was the former husband of the Maharaja's present wife.
[Guest]: So this coterie around the Maharaja, Sethu Lakshmivaya does not like, because she does
[Guest]: not like the corruption they're involved in.
[Guest]: She does not like the culture that's there.
[Guest]: When she's a child, she can't object, but as soon as she turns 18, she and her husband
[Guest]: start standing apart from each other.
[Amit Varma]: And there's even a rumor, like you pointed out, that this former husband of the present
[Amit Varma]: wife was behind the three deaths that happened.
[Guest]: There was a rumor that he got those princes killed because they were in his way.
[Guest]: They didn't support, they didn't approve of him.
[Guest]: So he's essentially a shady character.
[Guest]: So senior Rani is cornered, junior Rani becomes the main person, the mother of the new heir,
[Guest]: etc.
[Guest]: Then in 1924, the Maharaja, the reigning Maharaja dies in his 60s.
[Guest]: This creates an awkward situation because junior Rani's son is only 12 years old.
[Guest]: So he's not old enough to rule.
[Guest]: In North Indian patriarchal kingdoms, usually the British would appoint the wife or the
[Guest]: widow of the dead Maharaja as a regent, and they would appoint a pro-British regency council.
[Guest]: And this is how the state would be governed till the boy grew up.
[Guest]: And in the interim, the boy would be trained by Englishmen to be loyal to the British Empire
[Guest]: and so on.
[Guest]: Complete brainwashing would happen.
[Guest]: In Travancore, however, because it was matrilineal, the law was very clear.
[Guest]: If there is no male or if the existing male member is not in a capacity to rule either
[Guest]: for minority or for being mentally incapable or whatever, it is the power to rule goes
[Guest]: to the eldest female member.
[Guest]: What does that translate into?
[Guest]: Till the junior Rani's son comes of age, power vests with the senior Rani.
[Guest]: So for junior Rani's son, what she suddenly discovers is her sister is going to rule,
[Guest]: not her.
[Guest]: So first she says there should be a council and she should be a member.
[Guest]: Senior Rani says no.
[Guest]: There have been regents in the past in Travancore.
[Guest]: In fact, the word regent is a British invention.
[Guest]: In the matrilineal system, when a woman rules, she rules as Maharaja.
[Guest]: So in Malayalam documents, Sethulakshmi Bai is called Puraadam Tirunel Maharaja, not Maharani.
[Guest]: Colloquially, she's Maharani, but she's also a Maharaja when she rules.
[Guest]: And that means she has full powers.
[Guest]: There's no regency council put by the British.
[Guest]: She rules directly with the minister like all other rulers before her.
[Guest]: This now makes that power conflict between the sisters more direct because suddenly senior
[Guest]: Rani is in power for the junior son.
[Guest]: So the next seven years, senior is in control and the junior is waiting.
[Guest]: She's dying to sort of get her son in power.
[Guest]: And she eventually manages to persuade Lord Willingdon, who's the viceroy, to reduce the
[Guest]: regency by six months and get her son installed.
[Guest]: After which, you know, the feud between the sisters really does escalate in many ways.
[Amit Varma]: And what is interesting here is that you'd imagine that, okay, this young shy girl who
[Amit Varma]: is, you know, not very outgoing, you don't really know what she thinks.
[Amit Varma]: She is now the Maharaja, as it were.
[Amit Varma]: And she will just let, you know, her officers and whatever do their thing, or a husband
[Amit Varma]: do their thing and take a backseat.
[Amit Varma]: But no, this lady turns out to be extremely formidable and a significant early sign of
[Amit Varma]: this being the Vycombe rebel, you know, rebel.
[Guest]: In fact, when she comes to power, the then British resident in a confidential document
[Guest]: to the viceroy describes her as the pious orthodox domestic type, by which basically
[Guest]: he means she's a housewife.
[Guest]: She's not really going to rule.
[Guest]: Her husband is probably going to control her.
[Guest]: And that's how the government will be conducted until the Maharaja comes of age.
[Guest]: What they discover is no, she's actually got a mind of her own.
[Guest]: She is gentle.
[Guest]: She is shy.
[Guest]: She doesn't like the limelight.
[Guest]: But she's also exceedingly hardworking.
[Guest]: I mean, part of it is not surprising.
[Guest]: The fact is, she's been cornered for the last decade in court.
[Guest]: She's had no status.
[Guest]: So she has something to prove.
[Guest]: She knows that she's not going to hold power forever.
[Guest]: She's only going to hold it for a period of about seven to eight years.
[Guest]: And in that time, she somehow has to prove herself, she has to do her best.
[Guest]: And she and her husband have this joint pact that they're going to work as hard as possible
[Guest]: and try and get, you know, carve out their place in history because they know otherwise
[Guest]: once the junior Rani's son comes to power, they're going to be shunted back into the
[Amit Varma]: corner.
[Guest]: They're not really going to enjoy any influence after that.
[Guest]: So those seven years become very important for them.
[Guest]: And there is at that time, this Vycombe Satyagraha going on, which is to open up all roads around
[Guest]: the temple in Vycombe to Dalits as well.
[Guest]: Because till then, Dalits were not allowed on the spot.
[Guest]: And this is, there's a major agitation going on in the middle, there are floods in Kerala
[Guest]: like the recent floods we had in 2019 and 2018, chaos happening.
[Guest]: And this woman's coming to rule, a woman everybody thinks is a housewife has now suddenly been
[Guest]: placed in a position of ruling.
[Guest]: She however, breaks a lot of these notions about her.
[Guest]: She invites delegates to come and meet her, representatives of both sides.
[Guest]: She listens to her officials.
[Guest]: She listens to these people and she comes up with a compromise solution.
[Guest]: She meets with Gandhiji.
[Guest]: Gandhiji comes to, you know, talk to her and he's stunned because he comes to meet her
[Guest]: not in the palace because she moves around a lot.
[Guest]: She prefers staying in these little travelers' bungalows in different parts of the state.
[Guest]: So when Gandhiji comes, she's staying in a beach bungalow next to, in a guest house at
[Guest]: Varkala beach.
[Guest]: And he's stunned because he walks in and the story in the family goes that he thought that
[Guest]: she was her lady-in-waiting or something because he walks into a room and all he sees is this
[Guest]: woman dressed in plain white, no ornaments, like just a single chain around her neck and
[Guest]: standing in the room with her husband.
[Guest]: And Gandhiji thought that a princess or a queen or a Maharani would be in silks and
[Guest]: wearing pearls and diamonds and things like that.
[Guest]: And he wrote in his journal, in his magazine called Young India, that he walked in expecting
[Guest]: something like that.
[Guest]: But what he saw was this highly simple woman who should be a lesson to other Indian princes,
[Guest]: not only in simplicity, but also in how she behaves and her sort of perspective and her
[Guest]: views and so on.
[Guest]: And she hammers out a deal with Gandhiji saying that she's not going to bulldoze anything
[Guest]: through.
[Guest]: She says reform, you have to persuade people, win them over and through consensus is the
[Guest]: way she's going to work.
[Guest]: So she says fine, they want access to the roads, she'll give them access to three roads
[Guest]: around the temple.
[Guest]: There are four roads, right?
[Guest]: All four sides of the temple, take access to the three roads.
[Guest]: The fourth road, which is considered the main entrance and the Brahmins are all objecting
[Guest]: saying lower caste people should not be allowed, she said for the time being, let that be in
[Guest]: the hands of the Brahmins and she constructs a parallel road and she says this is open
[Guest]: to everybody irrespective of caste.
[Guest]: And slowly over the next four or five years, practically on a case-by-case basis based
[Guest]: on issues in different temples, she starts opening up public roads to all castes till
[Guest]: by 1929, basically all roads are thrown open to people of all castes.
[Guest]: And this is what sets the stage for something her successor does, which is to throw open
[Guest]: temples itself in the mid 1930s.
[Guest]: She sorts of builds up that process and allows that to happen.
[Guest]: She appoints as one of the first things she does when she's put in power, when she inherits
[Guest]: power from her uncle is to place a woman at the head of the medical department.
[Guest]: That was essentially like the health minister at the time.
[Guest]: She gets a woman in that position.
[Guest]: She starts nominating women to the Legislative Council of Travancore, a second representative
[Guest]: house there also she nominates women.
[Guest]: The first feature film that comes out of Kerala has a Dalit woman playing an upper caste lady
[Guest]: and her life is threatened.
[Guest]: All these men say, how dare a Dalit woman play upper caste roles.
[Guest]: This woman, the Marani gives her protection and actually ensures that she's kept safe.
[Guest]: There's midwives, she opens up very simple stuff, but stuff that has major repercussions
[Guest]: for women.
[Guest]: So, births, midwife classes are introduced, batches of midwives are trained and by the
[Guest]: end of her reign, one-fifth of all the births in Travancore are handled in a professional
[Guest]: manner even in villages because these midwives are sent out even to rural areas.
[Guest]: And this is something which would never strike a male Maharaja.
[Guest]: Yeah, because it's not really a thing for them.
[Guest]: But it's not like she focused only on health and women.
[Guest]: She also focused on public works.
[Guest]: Some of the biggest roads and highways and bridges that are still being used in Kerala
[Guest]: were built by her.
[Guest]: She allocated one-fifth of her revenues to public works and one-fifth of her revenues
[Guest]: to education, which meant there was a huge boost in school building and running schools,
[Guest]: including private schools.
[Guest]: She starts, in a major way, giving a lot of grants to even private schools so that they
[Guest]: can match up.
[Guest]: Textbook development, etc.
[Guest]: Schools that, you know, don't have enough material, she'll send them from the capital.
[Guest]: Public works, you know, Cochin Harbour.
[Guest]: Cochin became again a port of significance because she tied up with the Cochin Maharaja.
[Guest]: Cochin's not technically in her control, but she invested in it because she knew her state
[Amit Varma]: would also benefit.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, you've described that at length, and that kind of struck me because it shows
[Amit Varma]: an instinctive understanding, not just of the positive externalities of public goods
[Amit Varma]: like a port like that.
[Amit Varma]: She's actually spending money of her own kingdom on what belongs to another kingdom.
[Amit Varma]: Because like you said, Cochin is separate and the British have control.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, to not be stuck in a zero-sum mentality, to be able to understand that this
[Amit Varma]: will benefit us also seems remarkably forward.
[Amit Varma]: Another thing that struck me going back to her meeting with Gandhi was, two things struck
[Amit Varma]: me from that, like when he goes there to negotiate with her.
[Amit Varma]: One, as you describe, is that as he's leaving, she says, I hope before you leave Kerala,
[Amit Varma]: you'll meet the other Mahatma.
[Amit Varma]: And this other Mahatma she's referring to is Narayana Guru, who's actually from a lower
[Amit Varma]: caste.
[Amit Varma]: So it is almost astonishing that a Maharaja of a higher caste is, you know, referring
[Guest]: to a person.
[Guest]: And she never met him personally.
[Guest]: She never met him.
[Guest]: She knew his significance.
[Guest]: The thing is, what is interesting about her is, it's very difficult to place her in an
[Guest]: exact box, because she's not a feminist in the sense, like the junior Rani, she didn't
[Guest]: get a birth control activist at Trivandrum, but she's a feminist in the sense as J. Devika,
[Guest]: the feminist scholar in Trivandrum was telling me, when I interviewed her for the book, she
[Guest]: created spaces for women.
[Guest]: She didn't promote individual women.
[Guest]: She created spaces by putting aside seats for women in the legislative council, by allowing
[Guest]: women to go and study law, by giving scholarships for women to go to medical school, you know,
[Guest]: these programs that she started.
[Guest]: She started this very innovative scheme, where any girl in Travancore who went to college
[Guest]: was invited automatically to tea at the palace with the Maharani, just as a sort of incentive
[Guest]: saying that, you know, you can get access.
[Guest]: She was the chief celebrity of her time.
[Guest]: So this was a way of, you know, inspiring girls to actually go out of that.
[Amit Varma]: She was Kim Kardashian in the palace.
[Guest]: Well, I wouldn't use that analogy.
[Guest]: So she was, you know, she had innovative ways of promoting what she wanted.
[Guest]: So it was public works, but on a social level.
[Guest]: Look, the 1920s were a time of economic boom, till the Great Depression happens in 29.
[Guest]: There's a huge boom around the world.
[Guest]: She realizes that who are the engines of the economy in terms of trade and enterprise,
[Guest]: the Nayas and the Brahmins, the upper castes are landed communities, land is sinking, agriculture
[Guest]: is not the future, trade and business and factories, and these are the things that are
[Guest]: the future.
[Guest]: The communities that are doing this are who?
[Guest]: Syrian Christians, who are in a privileged community, and the Eidavas.
[Guest]: Now, the Eidavas were a low caste community that cultivated palm trees and toddy tappers,
[Guest]: etc.
[Guest]: But they also worked in Koya.
[Guest]: Now, earlier, they would produce Koya for local markets, their feudal lords, etc.
[Guest]: The colonial economy connected Travancore to the colonial ecosystem.
[Guest]: So suddenly their Koya mats and carpets and ropes were in high demand in England and in
[Guest]: Europe and different parts of the world in America.
[Guest]: Suddenly the Eidava community started getting, instead of being paid in kind for their services,
[Guest]: they started earning cash.
[Guest]: With cash, they started buying land, their enterprises grew, the whole community started
[Guest]: rising and a guru like Shri Narayana Guru gave it moral force, gave as a reformer and
[Guest]: as a man who stood up for their rights and said that you don't need the approval of the
[Guest]: upper castes.
[Guest]: He gave it moral force.
[Guest]: So by the 1920s, they became exceedingly powerful, even though they were technically a lower
[Guest]: caste.
[Guest]: Sethu Lakshmivaya recognized that.
[Guest]: She realized that the Syrian Christians and the Eidavas are the engines of growth.
[Guest]: She decided to promote these communities a great deal, much to the resentment of the
[Guest]: old feudal communities.
[Guest]: It's never easy.
[Guest]: I mean, think of places in India, there are places in Uttar Pradesh, even now, still caught
[Guest]: up in this feudal mentality.
[Guest]: So think of the 1920s in a highly caste based society like Kerala, a woman coming in and
[Guest]: promoting a lower caste and a Christian group, she appoints a Christian as her chief secretary,
[Guest]: she appoints a Christian as her chief minister.
[Guest]: It was I think the second time in Trivandrum's history that a Christian was made chief minister.
[Guest]: The first time was when the state didn't have much of a choice and the British resident
[Guest]: himself became the minister.
[Guest]: But this was the first time she actually appoints a Christian to that position.
[Guest]: So she had guts to do a lot of things of that nature, but she personally remained extremely
[Guest]: conservative.
[Guest]: There are amusing things like this, for example, when she came to power, both the British resident
[Guest]: and the man she chose as her chief minister, a man called Mr. Watts, both of these men
[Guest]: are in their 50s and they're both bachelors.
[Guest]: Sethu Rakshabhai says, no, no, no, I can't receive bachelors in the palace.
[Guest]: I can't be seen sitting and having conversations with unmarried men because she's orthodox.
[Guest]: What will people think about me?
[Guest]: So these poor men and middle-aged men are forced to go and marry women who are 20-30
[Guest]: years younger than them, simply because the Maharani insists that they would get married.
[Guest]: At the resident's wedding, she even sends a nice present saying that, you know, congratulations
[Guest]: on your wedding.
[Guest]: And the marriages are disasters because both are married highly younger, far younger women
[Guest]: than they should have and, you know, the marriages are disasters for them, but they had no option
[Guest]: but to get married because the Maharani of Travancore would not receive them in her drawing
[Guest]: room otherwise.
[Guest]: Every time she received them, she would make sure her husband was present.
[Guest]: Her enemies used this to say that she was not controlled by the husband and he's there
[Guest]: like this sort of conspiring weird influence behind her throne.
[Guest]: And the fact was that, you know, she said nobody should gossip about me having any contact
[Guest]: with unmarried men or any men face to face in a closed room.
[Guest]: So my husband will always be there.
[Guest]: And when a husband went hunting or shooting or whatever, she wouldn't meet the Diwan.
[Guest]: It would be difficult for them to get meetings with her because she would not meet face to
[Guest]: face with them.
[Guest]: She would correspond and write letters and do it through notes and files, but not in
[Guest]: person.
[Guest]: So personally, very conservative, but in terms of her policies, creating lots of spaces for
[Amit Varma]: women to grow.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, what struck me about her governance was that the way I would sum it up and tell
[Amit Varma]: me if you agree is that she was liberal, but not radical.
[Amit Varma]: And an illustration of that being again going back to her meeting with Gandhi when she meets
[Amit Varma]: him and she gives him the permission to make a statement about her feelings and the statement
[Amit Varma]: he makes basically says that, you know, that she isn't against, you know, this caste entry
[Amit Varma]: into temples and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But she is stuck in an entrance system where she cannot force it through herself.
[Amit Varma]: But if public opinion is changed, then she can make it happen.
[Amit Varma]: So she is not like a radical, she's not trying to force change through, she knows that things
[Guest]: will take time.
[Guest]: She's all about consensus and compromise.
[Guest]: She's all about, you know, working slowly rather than leaping with great radical enthusiasm
[Guest]: because she somehow has a distrust of it.
[Guest]: She's always very cautious about what she does.
[Guest]: But the result is that these seven years that she's in power become a huge boom in Travancore
[Guest]: because revenues rise, a port is being built, the railways come to Trivandrum, electricity
[Guest]: comes to Trivandrum, telephone services are expanded and open to the public.
[Guest]: Things that are only available in the palace are now open to everybody, girls start going
[Guest]: to medical school and there are major incentives for that, film industry becomes a reality
[Guest]: in Travancore slowly with that first film that she supports, you know, so all kinds
[Guest]: of developments are happening.
[Guest]: Of course, in the palace, things are also going bad in the sense that her sister is
[Guest]: completely chafing under this regime of the senior Rani.
[Guest]: The junior Rani hates the fact that she has to live for so many years under her sister's
[Guest]: thumb.
[Guest]: So there's feuds over how much money should be given to her.
[Guest]: So senior Rani says, your palace expenses, you decide how you want to spend it, those
[Guest]: expenses I'll give.
[Guest]: But junior Rani also wants more money, like she thinks anything connected with the future
[Guest]: Maharaja, she should be allowed to control.
[Guest]: But senior says, no, as the head of the matrilineal family, I am the eldest member, I will control
[Guest]: those aspects.
[Guest]: That is my privilege and prerogative.
[Guest]: And it is true.
[Guest]: But senior Rani takes it very personally.
[Guest]: At one point, there's a black magic incident, you know, where they're trying to tell that
[Amit Varma]: that was fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a bit more about that.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, there's you have a whole chapter on that.
[Guest]: That's, you know, it's interesting, because you always think the British sort of had the
[Guest]: documents are all boring and stayed etc.
[Guest]: But if you read these fortnightly reports that the British residents sent to Viceroy,
[Guest]: not just from Travancore, but from any court, it is essentially a gossip sheet.
[Guest]: Are these available online?
[Guest]: No, they're not.
[Guest]: They're in the archives, some in Delhi, but a lot in the British archives, because the
[Guest]: Indian copies were largely destroyed at the time of independence, so that Nehru could
[Guest]: not blackmail the princes.
[Guest]: So the ones however, whatever they took, they took and put it in London, away from the reach
[Guest]: of the Indian government.
[Guest]: So these are gossip sheets, because knowledge is power, intelligence is power, you know
[Guest]: what the weaknesses of a Raja are, who he's sleeping with, you know, whether he's homosexual,
[Guest]: things like that.
[Guest]: You discover little secrets like that about a man or about a ruling family.
[Guest]: It's far easier to control them, you know exactly where to hit them, where it hurts.
[Guest]: So what's fascinating is in this black magic episode, the British resident had his spies
[Guest]: informing him exactly about how many rats were being sacrificed, where the priests came
[Guest]: from, how much money they had been promised.
[Guest]: Nothing escaped his eye, like he knew exactly what was happening in the palace.
[Guest]: And this sets in, you know, starts turning other wheels, where the British start saying,
[Guest]: oh my God, you can't have the Maharaja exposed to a condition like this, we must separate
[Amit Varma]: him from his mother.
[Amit Varma]: And what the junior Rani was doing to sum up, or was alleged to be doing to sum up was
[Amit Varma]: carrying out rituals, which would even involve human sacrifice, where the idea was that the
[Amit Varma]: senior Rani dies, and her own kid, the next Maharaja is mentally incapacitated.
[Amit Varma]: So she basically becomes a queen.
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, the record seems to suggest her mother, which is Ravi Varma's younger
[Guest]: daughter.
[Guest]: She's the one who was the force behind this junior Rani by herself, I don't think was
[Guest]: much of a believer in black magic.
[Guest]: But the British often refer to the fact that the junior Rani's relations are a thoroughly
[Guest]: bad lot.
[Guest]: It's her brothers and her mother, they say that whenever they come to the palace, it's
[Guest]: chaos, because they start putting all these plots, they start working all these plots,
[Guest]: which is why finally, after this black magic and all that, the mother and the brothers
[Guest]: asked to leave.
[Guest]: They're told to go back to Mavelikara, which is where they come from, and not come back
[Guest]: to the palace.
[Guest]: They're not allowed to see the Maharaja without permission from the British, really.
[Guest]: And it's only after the boy grows up and becomes king that they're finally allowed to come
[Guest]: back.
[Guest]: So junior Rani spends a lot of her time traveling, she stays outside the state in Ooty and Calcutta
[Guest]: and places like that.
[Guest]: And she's enthusiastic about going out.
[Guest]: Now here there is a little bit of Sethu Lakshmi Bai's fault in the sense that the world is
[Guest]: changing.
[Guest]: Sethu Lakshmi Bai is still holding to that old royal protocol, because she thinks that
[Guest]: is her duty to preserve the existing system, build and change through consensus and compromise,
[Guest]: nothing too radical.
[Guest]: And that notion of royalty as being semi-divine must be above all criticism, you know, you
[Guest]: should always be seen to be perfect.
[Guest]: So if you're going out for parties, if you're going out and meeting people in Calcutta,
[Guest]: etc., if you're traveling, and that's costing the state a lot of money, these are things
[Guest]: that can be avoided.
[Guest]: In Sethu Lakshmi Bai's view, you should not do any of that.
[Guest]: Why do you need to do that?
[Guest]: Stay in the palace and live your life.
[Guest]: Why do you want to travel and all that?
[Guest]: Junior Rani is like anxious to even cross the seas and go abroad.
[Guest]: So there's even in terms of their personalities, the two women don't match.
[Guest]: One in the junior Rani sees the changing world.
[Guest]: She wants to be part of this changing universe, this pan-Indian network of glamorous Rajas,
[Guest]: Ranis and people like that.
[Guest]: She wants to be part of that.
[Guest]: Senior Rani does not understand it.
[Guest]: Finally in 1931, November 1931, the regency comes to an end.
[Guest]: The junior Rani's son comes to the throne, which essentially means that man doesn't have
[Guest]: much of a personality.
[Guest]: All the records suggest that he's a very gentle, wonderful human being, but as a king, somewhat
[Guest]: devoid of power that he needed to wield, because all that was controlled by his mother and
[Guest]: by his minister, the famous Sir C.P.
[Guest]: Ramaswamy Iyer, who would be the last powerful Diwan of Travancore.
[Guest]: And from this time, you start seeing Sethu Lakshmi Bai starts receiving a lot of harassment.
[Guest]: And it's all kinds of petty things, you know, like it's almost payback for the seven years
[Guest]: that she was in power.
[Guest]: And now her sister is basically giving her payback for it.
[Amit Varma]: But it struck me that she's also sort of tied into a lot of these superficial symbolic things.
[Amit Varma]: For example, you know, she wants a 21 gun salute to continue after she's whatever and
[Amit Varma]: all of these little petty things.
[Amit Varma]: So I can understand that, okay, she's going to negotiate over whatever her royal salary
[Amit Varma]: is and royal pension is or whatever.
[Guest]: But there are also these other petty things, which, for example, she's told that she must
[Guest]: come and call on the Maharaja every two weeks.
[Guest]: And she's like, I'm older than him.
[Guest]: I'm his aunt.
[Guest]: Why should I go and call on him?
[Guest]: The tradition is that he should come and call on me.
[Guest]: So then that proposal is gone.
[Guest]: Then they say, oh, your daughters must come and see him.
[Guest]: She says, fine.
[Guest]: But when the daughters are sent, they're told to meet the Maharaja alone.
[Guest]: And she says, no, my daughters are girls, they're children.
[Guest]: The Maharaja, that is the junior Rani's son, is a practical stranger to them.
[Guest]: They don't know him very well.
[Guest]: Till they grow up, once they grow up, they can see him alone.
[Guest]: But till they grow up, I will not allow my daughters to see the Maharaja by themselves.
[Guest]: Their father must be present.
[Guest]: Now, the junior Rani hates the senior's husband.
[Guest]: So why would she want him in the room?
[Guest]: So they say, no, as head of the family, he may not be able to persuade you to come and
[Guest]: see him, but he definitely has control over the children.
[Guest]: He's their official guardian.
[Guest]: So he can come on.
[Guest]: She has no option.
[Guest]: She has to live with that.
[Guest]: Then they say, all your jewelry must be sent to us for inspection every six months.
[Guest]: And Sethulakshmi Bai sees through the insult.
[Guest]: She's like, this is a way to get my jewelry back.
[Guest]: It has nothing to do with inspection.
[Guest]: It's harassment.
[Guest]: Like every six months, if you keep sending your personal jewelry for inspection, she's
[Guest]: like, just take the jewelry.
[Guest]: I'll make my private jewelry with my private money, with my income, my pension, and so
[Guest]: on.
[Guest]: So at one point she wants to travel, they won't let her travel.
[Guest]: There's even petty things, for example, as Maharani of the state, she's entitled to guards
[Guest]: and certain protection.
[Guest]: Now, she does not like living in Trivandrum once her sister's son comes to power because
[Guest]: it's unhealthy.
[Guest]: She doesn't want to stay there.
[Guest]: She builds a private house for herself outside Trivandrum in a village and she wants to retire
[Guest]: and live in the village.
[Guest]: But they say, oh, but your protection must come with you because you're the queen.
[Guest]: So instead of guards being posted there for a certain number of days, every day the guards
[Guest]: have to be changed, which means every day the guards have to go to the village, come
[Guest]: back to Trivandrum.
[Guest]: And who's got to pay for this?
[Guest]: The senior Rani has to supply the money for this.
[Guest]: So she's like, you're trying to bleed me, then don't give me guards because I can't
[Guest]: afford to have guards moving up and down when they can stay there for 15 days at a stretch.
[Guest]: You know, let them stay there.
[Guest]: Why do you want to keep moving them up and down?
[Guest]: There's that.
[Guest]: At one point, they take over her ancestral estates.
[Guest]: A senior Rani, she controls a 15,000 acre estate.
[Guest]: And it is through that that her servants are paid, her establishment is paid.
[Guest]: She doesn't have a separate income.
[Guest]: That is what supplies her, her chief source of personal income.
[Guest]: They take over that.
[Guest]: And the British basically shut their eyes and allow the Maharaja to do it.
[Guest]: Because the British are coming from a patriarchal thing.
[Guest]: They're like, yeah, Maharani must listen to the Maharaja.
[Guest]: She can't independently work.
[Guest]: They don't understand that in the matrilineal system, family matters are decided by the
[Guest]: head of the family.
[Guest]: That is not gendered.
[Guest]: The head of the family is the oldest member of the family, which whether it's male or
[Guest]: female, you have to listen to that person.
[Guest]: Technically, Sethulakshmi is the head of the family, but she has no voice there.
[Guest]: She, you know, when she rules, when she finishes her reign in 1931, she's ruled exceedingly
[Guest]: well.
[Guest]: The British love her, nationalists like Gandhiji love her.
[Guest]: The people respect her.
[Guest]: And you find this even in records to the late 1940s.
[Guest]: She's been out of power for 18 years, not seen by anybody before 18 years.
[Guest]: But even VP Menon and his people who come to negotiate the integration with the Indian
[Guest]: Union say that Sethulakshmi is far more popular than the junior Rani and her son, who've been
[Guest]: ruling for the last 17 years.
[Guest]: Because her memory is still extremely fond as far as the people are concerned.
[Guest]: So she has to really negotiate with the Maharaja and finally get the British involved to get
[Guest]: a decent pension, which is 75,000 rupees a year.
[Guest]: Now, you look at what North Indian Rajas of much smaller, poorer states were spending
[Guest]: 75,000 was a very modest amount.
[Guest]: So Maharaja with great resistance finally satisfies and gives her a 75,000 rupee pension.
[Guest]: She wanted more, but she gets 75,000 rupees.
[Guest]: His 18 year old brother or 19 year old brother casually gives him a one lakh rupee allowance.
[Guest]: This is all a signal.
[Guest]: So you rule for seven years, work hard and actually rule the state, you get only 75,000.
[Guest]: My younger brother, who's just turned 19, a teenager, he gets one lakh a year.
[Guest]: That's his allowance.
[Guest]: So all of this makes her realize that she is essentially becoming a second class citizen.
[Guest]: This kind of pettiness you see even now in government, right, it's the kind of things
[Guest]: the current ruling dispensation, for example, does against a certain family, for example,
[Guest]: or petty things like denying leader of opposition post on certain technicalities, reducing somebody's
[Guest]: security, etc.
[Guest]: Which is not a bad thing, frankly, you still have security, but it's all about making them
[Guest]: feel like you are no longer what you used to be.
[Guest]: And that happened a lot here as well.
[Guest]: She was increasingly marginalized and cornered.
[Guest]: And finally, in the 1940s, she had an estate that she purchased privately in the hills.
[Guest]: So she couldn't, her family could have summer vacations there, taken over by the state.
[Guest]: It had to wait till after independence that she got it back.
[Guest]: The government of India gave it back to her, not the government of Trivandrum.
[Guest]: For 10 years, it was in the hands of the Maharaja because he said, no, I'm going to take over
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: So her private residences, she was told by the 1940s, you can't stay in your private
[Guest]: houses, you must live in Trivandrum.
[Guest]: And because her estate has been taken over, it means her servants are controlled by the
[Guest]: junior Rani's son, her house is controlled by the junior Rani's son.
[Guest]: And perhaps the greatest tragedy of her life, that palace was built by her, she raised her
[Guest]: children there.
[Guest]: When the partition of family properties took place in the 1970s, the Maharaja claimed that
[Guest]: palace and even though she went to the Supreme Court, she didn't get it.
[Guest]: So the palace she built, in which she lived, in which she ruled, in which her children
[Guest]: were raised, that also went to her sister's son.
[Guest]: So, you know, it was no wonder that as soon as independence came, the Maharani had two
[Guest]: daughters.
[Guest]: The older daughter said, I am done with being royalty.
[Guest]: I mean, this is an oppressive, harassed sort of existence.
[Guest]: We've got, it's like living in a gilded cage.
[Guest]: You've got all the servants and technically the money and the privileges, but you have
[Guest]: no freedom.
[Guest]: You can't go from one room to the other without being followed by servants who are all paid
[Guest]: by the other center.
[Guest]: The other ones were actually in power.
[Guest]: So this resentment builds up.
[Guest]: So the daughter says, I'm done being royalty.
[Guest]: I'm going to Bangalore.
[Guest]: She goes off to Bangalore, buys a private house there, puts all her children into school.
[Guest]: So her, from being Her Highness Uttaram Tirunel Lalitha Amba Bai Tamburan, second princess
[Guest]: of Travancore, the girl becomes simply Lalitha Varma.
[Guest]: She gives up her title.
[Guest]: She becomes just Lalitha Varma, puts all her children into public schools, starts driving
[Guest]: her own car.
[Guest]: And it's an education for her from day one.
[Guest]: There's this wonderful story in the family about how she went to Bangalore club to shop.
[Guest]: Bangalore club has these shops.
[Guest]: And this is 1949, soon after she's arrived.
[Guest]: So she's put all the things in the basket and she's taken to the till.
[Guest]: And the lady says, that'll be 89 rupees, madam.
[Guest]: And she says, what are rupees because she's never actually dealt with currency.
[Guest]: She understands the vague concept.
[Guest]: So her driver from behind is to say, don't worry, let her go, I'll pay because she's
[Guest]: as you know, alien to this independent life as that.
[Guest]: But from there, she starts becoming a very autonomous figure, becomes, as her children
[Guest]: say, her greatest ambition in life was to be a housewife, because she had seen what
[Guest]: power did.
[Guest]: She had seen what palaces and that kind of that quest for money and power could do.
[Guest]: She didn't want any of that.
[Guest]: She just wanted her children to be happy, almost middle class people who had little
[Guest]: jobs and little things and they all live together happily.
[Guest]: And that is the life she wanted.
[Guest]: The Maharani Sethulakshmi Bai would come and the story, she came first in 1951.
[Guest]: And she was scandalized to discover that her children were crossing the road to go to school.
[Guest]: Because the school was the Baldwin Girls School on Richmond Road in Bangalore, just across
[Guest]: their gate.
[Guest]: And their gate was here.
[Guest]: She said, no, no, no, how these poor children look at them with their heavy bags, and they're
[Guest]: going to school walking and they have to cross the road, it's very dangerous.
[Guest]: So while she was there, she insisted children go by car.
[Guest]: And she had this stretch limo, a Humber.
[Guest]: All these granddaughters of hers would be put into this car and taken to school on the
[Guest]: other side.
[Guest]: And the story goes that in those days, Richmond Road was so narrow that when the front of
[Guest]: the car was in the school, the back was still in the house.
[Guest]: That is the kind of world they had to start adjusting to.
[Guest]: Then of course, 1950s, ironically for a family that had all this protocol, 300 servants around
[Guest]: them, you know, Martha and Audma created all this artificial vocabulary, they're always
[Guest]: referred to as Highnesses and all of that.
[Guest]: What happens in Kerala?
[Guest]: The commies come to power.
[Guest]: One day, Sethu Lakshmi wakes up and discovers her servants in the palace.
[Guest]: She's sent away most of them because the privy purse the Maharaja gets, he doesn't support
[Guest]: her from that.
[Guest]: She has to live out of her own minor income of 50,000 rupees a year that the government
[Guest]: of India has bestowed on her.
[Guest]: She has to manage her palace with that.
[Guest]: So she's reduced her staff to 50 servants and 25 work for 10 days and then 15 days and
[Guest]: then the other 25 take over.
[Guest]: So very small establishment, but they formed a union and someone's gone and put the communist
[Guest]: flag on top of the palace.
[Guest]: And that's when she discovers, why am I even living here?
[Guest]: You know, I'm not welcome here.
[Guest]: The Maharaja doesn't want me, doesn't seem to respect me.
[Guest]: I have to maintain a palace at great personal expense.
[Guest]: My daughters have left.
[Guest]: The younger daughter had gone off to Madras by then, where her husband became a lawyer
[Guest]: because he wanted to have a profession.
[Guest]: She decides to move to Bangalore and this woman, you know, in the middle of a siege
[Guest]: practically by her servants, where the police are deployed to make sure that she can safely
[Guest]: get out of the palace because they're refusing to operate the palace.
[Guest]: Palaces are not built like individual houses.
[Guest]: You can't just go and cook your food in the kitchen and not that she knew how to cook.
[Guest]: So you know, you needed your servants to operate it.
[Guest]: She leaves the palace and never comes back.
[Guest]: So she gets out of the palace, sits in her car.
[Guest]: First she drives to the Padmanabhaswamy temple, the family deity.
[Guest]: In the car, she turns around saying, forgive me.
[Guest]: I'm not staying anymore.
[Guest]: You are now in my heart.
[Guest]: I will never be able to see you again, goes to the railway station, which is the last
[Guest]: time in her life where a crowd of people bow to her because they recognize the Maharani
[Guest]: of Travancore.
[Guest]: They know who she is.
[Guest]: She gets in a train, first goes to Madras.
[Guest]: From there, stays with her younger daughter for a while, then drives off to Bangalore.
[Guest]: And in Bangalore, she purchases the house next to her sister's, constructs a little
[Guest]: bungalow there and it's called Srinivas.
[Guest]: And there's this wonderful envelope, you know, her title fully was Her Highness Shri Padmanabha
[Guest]: Sevini Vanchi Dharma Varthini Raja Rajeshwari, Maharani Pooradam Dhirnaal Sethu Lakshmibai
[Guest]: Maharaja, Artingal Moortha Thamburan, Companion of the Most Imperial Order of the Crown of
[Guest]: India.
[Guest]: That was her full title.
[Guest]: But as soon as she moves to Bangalore, she starts signing her letters, etc. simply Srimati
[Guest]: Sethu Lakshmibai.
[Guest]: She's given up her title.
[Guest]: Like her daughter, she just decides to become a nobody.
[Guest]: And then after this, from 1957, she dies in 1985.
[Guest]: All these two and a half decades that she lived, she never went back to Kerala.
[Guest]: And slowly the state starts acquiring her various properties.
[Guest]: She's told one fine day that the house that she'd built in the village where she wasn't
[Guest]: allowed to stay by the Maharaja, it was still hers, state wants to start an agriculture
[Guest]: college there.
[Guest]: She says, fine, take it.
[Guest]: Her husband had a house by the beach where he kept his things, etc.
[Guest]: State got involved and said, we are acquiring this for tourism purposes.
[Guest]: No option.
[Guest]: You have to give it up to the state.
[Guest]: Slowly everything has gone till finally in the 1970s, they want to set up a medical research
[Guest]: facility in her official palace.
[Guest]: Although the Maharaja is the owner and he eventually gets the compensation for it.
[Guest]: They can't do it without her permission because she's in possession of the keys.
[Guest]: So the man comes, MS Valyatan, the celebrated medical grandee.
[Guest]: So he shows up and he told me this, that he showed up there and many people told her don't
[Guest]: do this.
[Guest]: How are you giving up your last thing left in Kerala to somebody?
[Guest]: And she sort of, he misses his flight.
[Guest]: By the time he gets to her house in Bangalore, it's midnight, this is in 76 or so.
[Guest]: And she's waiting.
[Guest]: She's awake.
[Guest]: And her daughter says, of course, she's awake.
[Guest]: She's waiting to sign the papers.
[Guest]: And he brings her the paper.
[Guest]: She signs her right over the palace of claims that gives up her possession, hands over the
[Guest]: keys.
[Guest]: And then she looks up to him, holds up her hands and says, Valyatan, this is my freedom
[Guest]: at midnight.
[Guest]: Because now she has nothing.
[Guest]: Like for a woman who was queen from the age of five, from the age of five, she had a 21
[Guest]: gun salute.
[Guest]: She had 300 servants.
[Guest]: Her own father would bow to her.
[Guest]: Her husband refers to her highness.
[Guest]: She's never known a life different.
[Guest]: She's never known another existence.
[Guest]: From there, suddenly, and she turns to a family member and says, once I had a kingdom, but
[Guest]: that is gone.
[Guest]: Then I thought I had my palaces, but that those are gone, too.
[Guest]: Then I thought I had this house.
[Guest]: But now I can only say I have this room because that is what her life is reduced to that one
[Guest]: room where she's increasingly crippled.
[Guest]: She can't go out.
[Unknown]: And she's stuck there.
[Guest]: And, you know, all as a grandson told me, all she sees is the sun and the morning and
[Guest]: evening happening through her windows.
[Guest]: And she's just sitting there in that room for the next 20 years of her life.
[Guest]: And when finally she dies in 1985, she's cremated in an electric crematorium, surrounded just
[Guest]: by family members like anybody's grandmother.
[Guest]: Nobody would know this was a person who once dealt with Gandhi, who once dealt with Mussolini's
[Guest]: daughter, who once impressed Rabindranath Tagore, who once ruled and controlled the
[Guest]: destinies of five million people.
[Guest]: None of that.
[Guest]: She disappeared as a complete nobody.
[Guest]: And for me, that arc was fascinating to think that even now for people to give up power,
[Guest]: it's so difficult.
[Guest]: You know, when you have power, it's very difficult to give up your conveniences and enjoying
[Guest]: that power, to give up money, to become a nobody.
[Guest]: And here was this woman who, from the beginning, first she couldn't produce the melee, then,
[Guest]: you know, she couldn't keep herself on good terms with her sister.
[Guest]: Then she was harassed a great deal by her sister and her son, the Maharaja, made to
[Guest]: feel unwelcome in the royal family itself.
[Guest]: Communists sieged her palace and sort of took over control and she had to leave.
[Guest]: Her palace itself was seized by various people.
[Guest]: Her children didn't want any part of her royal legacy.
[Guest]: And she ends up, you know, accepting the fact that she's become a nobody.
[Guest]: And for a Brahmin-controlled palace, where even her meals were cooked by sacred thread-wearing
[Guest]: high caste groups, by the end of her life, it was Christian maids and Nair, you know,
[Guest]: so-called Shudra women who are cooking her meals.
[Guest]: And she accepted that.
[Guest]: And she lived with that sort of thing.
[Guest]: And that acceptance of her fate, understanding that the page of history had turned, not only
[Guest]: was the royal class irrelevant, she in particular was doubly irrelevant.
[Guest]: And she had been reduced to a footnote in the history of Travancore for all her achievements.
[Guest]: The future was controlled by the junior maharajas.
[Guest]: Ironically, the junior Maharani's family still live in a palace in Trivandrum.
[Guest]: And again, I didn't include this in the book.
[Guest]: But if you look at the National Archives, there is this tone of surprise because VP
[Guest]: Menon and his colleague Velody, they come to Trivandrum to negotiate Privy Purse and
[Guest]: the allowances, etc.
[Guest]: And Velody writes a letter to VP Menon in Delhi saying that, I was completely startled
[Guest]: by the fact that Maharaja is negotiating what amount he should get, what his mother, brother,
[Guest]: his family members should get.
[Guest]: But he did not once refer to the senior Maharani.
[Guest]: It felt as though she doesn't even exist as far as the Maharaja is concerned.
[Guest]: And they were surprised by the pettiness of it.
[Guest]: They were surprised that he wouldn't even acknowledge her existence to begin with.
[Guest]: As small things, for example, you know, again, it's not in the book, but in the archives,
[Guest]: they talk about how the Maharaja gets electricity exemption, free electricity for himself and
[Guest]: his brother's palace, nothing for the senior Rani.
[Guest]: So she is now, she's not getting a share of the Privy Purse.
[Guest]: She's getting 50,000 rupees as allowance in a year.
[Guest]: She has to maintain a palace, no privileges other than, you know, the money that she gets.
[Guest]: And you know, not even mentioned as a factor in the negotiations.
[Guest]: Finally, it's a VP Menon and Velodi themselves go to the senior Maharani.
[Guest]: They find out from her, and she's got pretty modest demand.
[Guest]: She's like, my children should not be treated unfairly.
[Guest]: If the other family is getting certain allowances, my children should get something similar.
[Guest]: In the end, they don't.
[Guest]: They get a smaller allowance because they have no power.
[Guest]: And it's interesting to see that although technically a royalty, although technically
[Guest]: you're a queen, you're entirely powerless.
[Guest]: And having to live through that, I thought was interesting, whereas a junior Rani's family,
[Guest]: they continue to live there.
[Guest]: I think the last time the Maharani's met was before Sethu Lakshmibai leaves for Bangalore
[Guest]: in 1957.
[Guest]: And then they meet once more in their life, which is 23 years, almost 23 years later in
[Guest]: 1979.
[Guest]: Four years before the junior Rani dies, and you know, six years before the senior Rani
[Guest]: dies, the junior Rani calls up and expresses a desire to meet her older sister.
[Guest]: And the family tells me that she didn't want, the senior Rani didn't want to meet because
[Guest]: here she was a bedridden in Bangalore in this house and you know, she didn't feel like,
[Guest]: this was a past that she had forgotten that she, that was a different person and this
[Guest]: was a different person.
[Guest]: A toxic world she left behind.
[Guest]: She didn't want to be part of that, but she couldn't say no either.
[Guest]: So they came, they had a nice little meeting, etc.
[Unknown]: And that was that.
[Guest]: And you know, she did ask one thing apparently, and this I'm not putting the book because
[Guest]: I can't substantiate it with documents, but interviews with her family members, they told
[Guest]: me that she did ask the junior Rani, that why are you even taking my palace, you know,
[Guest]: that palace which she built, where her children were brought up, which was home for them,
[Guest]: their final property in Kerala, why are you even claiming that?
[Guest]: And junior Rani had some answer for it saying, oh no, but you know, something on the other.
[Guest]: And she said, you know, she just smiled and she said, okay, fine.
[Guest]: Clearly this is, even asking for that much is too much as far as she was concerned.
[Guest]: So she said, forget it.
[Guest]: And her daughter's children, you know, they have very little awareness of their royal
[Guest]: heritage.
[Guest]: I mean, they're aware of it.
[Guest]: They know that it's there.
[Guest]: And they know their grandmother was somebody important, but they have very few royal heirs
[Guest]: because they're like, she abandoned it.
[Guest]: She'd gave it up.
[Guest]: So why should we, you know, feel like we are entitled to something?
[Guest]: And I thought that, well, there was a tragic element to it.
[Guest]: I mean, there is criticism that she presided over a feudal court, it was casteist and she
[Guest]: of course had her weaknesses and her flaws naturally.
[Guest]: But on the whole, if you look at the story, you know, it ends on a very tragic note.
[Guest]: And I was just keen to sort of make sure that, you know, this lady who led this very remarkable
[Guest]: life, forget the personal drama, even what she achieved in that space of seven years,
[Guest]: those seven years are just remarkable, the kind of reforms and changes she made, Keralites
[Guest]: are still enjoying the benefits of those seven years, the same roads, we're still using that
[Guest]: with the Cochin harbour, the schools, the buildings, the colleges, all of that is still
[Guest]: there.
[Guest]: And I was like, that deserves some sort of commemoration.
[Guest]: So all the Travancore history you would find was pro Junior Rani's family, because they
[Guest]: continue to live in Trivandrum, they continue to have a very important sort of profile there.
[Guest]: They are influential people there.
[Guest]: So all the local historians are focused on them.
[Guest]: My job was to revise that record slightly and put things in the perspective, because
[Amit Varma]: the record is clear.
[Amit Varma]: To go beyond the seen into the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, correct.
[Amit Varma]: No, the line that really stuck me from your story is the sort of the self awareness and
[Amit Varma]: the reflective nature of the Senior Rani when she signs away her final property papers and
[Amit Varma]: says, this is my freedom at midnight.
[Amit Varma]: And it strikes me that, you know, the story you've told is from her childhood till you
[Amit Varma]: know, she's out of the throne.
[Amit Varma]: And it strikes me that there's a fantastic story there as well of giving up royalty and
[Amit Varma]: learning to live as a normal person and coming to terms with all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm sure some of that of stripping the baggage of the past must also involve a lot
[Amit Varma]: of self reflection, which would be, you know, really interesting in a book.
[Amit Varma]: But that's really not a task for a historian, but a novelist or a poet.
[Amit Varma]: It will do well in a novel.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: See, the thing is, when you're doing a biography, your greatest challenge is trying to get into
[Guest]: the mind of that person.
[Guest]: And here I was a fairly young person starting at 19.
[Guest]: And even when I finished, I was only in my mid 20s, trying to decipher the mind of a
[Guest]: woman who had lived in a different world, who had died 30 years before me, I mean, five
[Guest]: years before I was born, you know, and occupied such a different space altogether.
[Guest]: And she's a woman.
[Guest]: So it's like, it's not easy to sort of penetrate a mind that is, you know, so lost in time
[Guest]: and so lost even in terms of its basic nature.
[Guest]: But you know, I thought for me, it was a rewarding experience and the wealth of material.
[Guest]: The one thing I think the vindication really is that, although she was treated badly and
[Guest]: which is written out of history, the records were there.
[Guest]: So for me, it was just a question of resurrecting her from the records.
[Guest]: The records make it very clear that she suffered, that she was treated badly, that she went
[Guest]: through everything from black magic to her money being reduced to a palace being taken
[Guest]: over by others.
[Guest]: And it tells you so much about human behavior as well.
[Guest]: It tells you that even you can have all the power in the world, you can have all the money
[Guest]: in the world.
[Guest]: But decency is a quality that does not necessarily come to every human being.
[Guest]: So how have her grandchildren read your book?
[Guest]: How have they reacted?
[Guest]: For them, a lot of them, it surprised a lot of them, they didn't know this.
[Guest]: They didn't know a lot.
[Guest]: I mean, they knew vaguely that she had suffered because she had come away to Bangalore.
[Guest]: So they knew that their family's exodus to Bangalore.
[Guest]: And even now in India, we have people who have coronations and they pretend to be Maharajas
[Guest]: and they have these titles that they still use.
[Guest]: And here is a woman in 1950s itself, the family gives up everything and moves up and doesn't
[Guest]: go back.
[Guest]: Like they, as one granddaughter told me, they don't have a spot of land where they can stick
[Guest]: a needle and say, this is ours in a kingdom that their ancestors ruled for centuries,
[Guest]: because that's the choice that their family made.
[Guest]: Because they were not aware of all the details of the extent to which their grandmother had
[Guest]: to face harassment and various problems, etc.
[Guest]: They were not aware of the degree to which court intrigue could completely upset a person's
[Amit Varma]: life.
[Amit Varma]: Or even the things she achieved, like winning Gandhi's respect, governing so well, you know,
[Amit Varma]: being so reformist in her thinking about caste and gender, however, she might have been in
[Amit Varma]: personal life.
[Guest]: All of that is pretty, I think they were surprised in many ways, in many ways by that.
[Amit Varma]: One of the interesting things she also did was she struck down the matrilineal system
[Guest]: by law.
[Guest]: Irony, no?
[Guest]: She inherited power through that system, but it was in her time that it was formally abolished,
[Guest]: because by then the clamor for patriarchal families and nuclear families grew.
[Guest]: The thing was matrilineal families were also joint families, so which means all the properties
[Guest]: tied up.
[Guest]: So as I said, the Irawas and the Christians are moneyed classes, they're moving ahead.
[Guest]: So the Nayas felt we need to also move ahead.
[Guest]: Now all you have is land, so you sell the land, which means land has to be partitioned.
[Guest]: Partition means you have to break the joint family, which means the matrilineal family
[Guest]: has to break.
[Guest]: And also your education system, your new morality is telling you patriarchy is the way to go
[Guest]: forward.
[Guest]: So all things come together in 1825.
[Guest]: This lady, Saitulakshmi Bai is the one who ironically ends up abolishing the matrilineal
[Guest]: system.
[Guest]: And in many ways, she's the last representative of that system.
[Guest]: She her story is a story of how that that that conflict with an emerging new patriarchal
[Guest]: morality upsets and reduces the position of matrilineal women.
[Guest]: And the male Maharaja, who's her technically a nephew, and therefore lower to her in the
[Guest]: palace, high in the family hierarchy, suddenly becomes the main person because he's a man.
[Amit Varma]: And it's interesting.
[Amit Varma]: She is the last person to climb on that branch, and then she cuts it off herself.
[Amit Varma]: So that's really been very fascinating, and it's almost time to wrap it up.
[Amit Varma]: But before we go, you know, looking at modern Kerala today, it's kind of interesting that
[Amit Varma]: like you pointed out earlier, attitudes and social norms and mores that we think have
[Amit Varma]: come down from time immemorial can often be very recent, like, for example, the Victorian
[Amit Varma]: morality and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: How much of that ancient Kerala, which you describe in your book through the middle years
[Amit Varma]: of the century, the empower empowered women and so on, is actually present in modern Kerala?
[Guest]: You see, you know, the hints are very clear, for example, Kerala has the India's highest
[Guest]: divorce rate.
[Guest]: That's partly because I think as a legacy of the majorly in the system, which is, by
[Amit Varma]: the way, a great thing, because it means more women are empowered.
[Guest]: They have agency.
[Guest]: If you're in a bad marriage, leaving it is not taboo.
[Amit Varma]: I once wrote a column saying we should celebrate rising divorce rates, which of course got
[Guest]: me told because it's like, what the fuck, yeah, but as an indicator, it's always a great
[Guest]: thing because it shows that women will not take nonsense from their husbands simply to
[Guest]: stay in a marriage.
[Guest]: A high divorce rate is a mark that at least the women have that much agency.
[Guest]: They similarly, you know, people often say rape is highest in Kerala, reported rape,
[Guest]: that is to say, women in Kerala feel that they can report it.
[Guest]: And there will be consequences to the culprits for that.
[Guest]: Whereas in some states of India, there's so much taboo that most women won't even report
[Amit Varma]: it.
[Guest]: So basically, there's just no point, you know, high, you know, rape thing on record is a
[Guest]: sign again, that women are not, they don't feel like their life ends because of a violation
[Guest]: of their of their person and their body.
[Guest]: So there's, you know, there are advantages and you see markers like that, which speak
[Guest]: to you.
[Guest]: But they had lots of other weird thing, which is that the matrilineal system as it was fading.
[Guest]: So my great grandmother, she went to school, because by then it was normal for girls to
[Guest]: go to school.
[Guest]: And what was interesting though, is this while girls were allowed to go to school, Kerala
[Guest]: was one of the first places to allow girls to go to school because matrilineal permitted
[Guest]: women literacy and education.
[Guest]: That new system of education was a patriarchal one.
[Guest]: So it was also the same textbooks and the same thing that subconsciously told these
[Guest]: women, your job is to be good wives, your job is to be good mothers, and you must be
[Guest]: maternal, let your husbands handle things like that.
[Guest]: So it also ingrained a strange kind of patriarchy in Kerala, and that is also equally alive.
[Guest]: So on the one hand, you do have women with agency, but you also have a deeply entrenched
[Guest]: patriarchal mindset in Kerala now, entirely artificial, entirely born out of male insecurities.
[Guest]: Because in the 19th century, these men felt like they had to control their women to be
[Guest]: masculine.
[Guest]: But that also exists simultaneously.
[Guest]: So you have both things that actually exist in Kerala.
[Guest]: But one of the things that advantages that the state has because it had rulers like Sethu
[Guest]: Lakshmibai is that Kerala is talking language, the language of the right to internet, because
[Guest]: there's no roti, kappadam, makan problem in Kerala.
[Guest]: These things were already handled a while ago.
[Guest]: Kerala is the one state where land reforms did work, it actually meant something.
[Guest]: Earlier, in many North Indian states, land reforms were just on paper.
[Guest]: In reality, families managed to find loopholes and jump through it.
[Guest]: Whereas in Kerala, land reforms actually did take place and most of the land was in many
[Guest]: ways redistributed and other people ended up getting lots of land.
[Guest]: So there are changes in Kerala that were born out of not only the communists who did a great
[Guest]: job at least for as far as welfarism is concerned, but also the previous royal rulers.
[Guest]: Because under pressure from the colonial state, under pressure from a lot of missionaries,
[Guest]: they had no option but to invest in education, but to slowly peel back social inequalities,
[Guest]: build up infrastructure in the state and that has therefore kept the state in a very, let's
[Guest]: say, enviable position as far as human life is concerned.
[Guest]: It has issues in manufacturing and industry.
[Guest]: But overall, you know, life in Kerala, you enter Kerala, the first thing you'll see is
[Guest]: ads for fabric, textiles and gold, because it's one of the biggest consumer states in
[Guest]: the country for gold and textiles, because people have disposable income.
[Guest]: You drive through Kerala villages, everybody has a pakka house, most of these houses are
[Guest]: flamboyant houses, often, you know, financed by Dubai money.
[Guest]: But the point is that people have a lifestyle that is fairly superior.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, I read on the internet recently that there was a survey of the fastest growing
[Guest]: cities in the world and three of the top 10 were Kerala.
[Amit Varma]: And you could argue four if Sharjah is to be included.
[Amit Varma]: So let's move from the state of Kerala to the state of Manipally.
[Amit Varma]: You told me the last time we met, that you wanted to write three books before 30.
[Amit Varma]: That is done.
[Amit Varma]: You have written three books before 30.
[Amit Varma]: Is the rest of your life a long, slow decline like Sethu Lakshmibai, or what are you working
[Guest]: on now?
[Guest]: No, I am working on something.
[Guest]: In fact, the research is more or less done, I just have to digest the research and start
[Guest]: writing.
[Guest]: So my deadline is 2022 to publish the book.
[Guest]: So but that is a lot of work, because I'm also doing my PhD.
[Guest]: So I'm on leave at the moment, but I resume at the end of the summer.
[Guest]: So I have to focus on PhD and my writing.
[Guest]: And this is perhaps my most ambitious book.
[Guest]: In many ways, it will probably be also my most controversial book.
[Guest]: I mean, so far, you know, writing about forgotten Sultans of the Deccan, forgotten Queen of
[Unknown]: Triumph.
[Guest]: You can say some important things, but you know, it doesn't upset the political weirdos
[Guest]: that are out there.
[Guest]: But the next one, I have a feeling might just get a few rotten eggs to sort of perk up and
[Guest]: think my God, how dare he say this.
[Guest]: So there is there is that project underway, but it will take me a while to actually, you
[Guest]: know, complete it.
[Amit Varma]: Well, it's a pleasure having you on the scene and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I hope when your next controversial book gets done, do come here.
[Guest]: This is one platform which will still welcome your heretical views.
[Guest]: I'll let you know as soon as it's out so we can do a scene and the unseen session.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, thanks a lot, Manu.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to the episode, do go on over to your nearest bookstore online
[Amit Varma]: or offline and buy The Ivory Thrown by Manu Pillay.
[Amit Varma]: Do search for his other books.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow Manu on Twitter at Unampillay.
[Amit Varma]: That's Manu upside down or backside whatever.
[Amit Varma]: Unampillay, you can follow me at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A, the way the people in Kerala
[Amit Varma]: write Verma and not these ignorant North Indians.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of The Scene and the Unseen at sceneunseen.in and thinkpragati.com.
[Amit Varma]: The Scene and the Unseen is supported by the Takshashila Institution.
[Amit Varma]: You can check out all their courses in public policy at takshashila.org.in.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening.